Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the vocabulary of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, my sons, I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, in order to fulfill its purpose and due to its expositions and declarations, I believe that I have completed this treatise, which is part of surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The surgery of the mother is prohibited in our region and time, until recently, when the science of it was revealed, and its evidence is now established; and no one practices it except a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which were most harmful and led to errors and doubts until the understanding of it was closed and its force was prolonged and its art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I believe that I have lived according to the order of this treatise in the second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of the cautery and of the other instruments of the work, as well as for addition to the declaration, and for its preparation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	In ancient times, the cause for why an artist was not skilled in their own hand was because the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary to exercise that skill in the science of anatomy, which Gallus discovered before knowing the importance of the members and the forms of those, and the conjunction and separation of them; and having knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their breadth; and of the pulsating veins and quiet vessels, and the locations of their origin.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason, Hippocrates said that one name is not enough, but in the work, it is smaller, and more so in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	Because we have already mentioned that one in the introduction of this book; for those who do not know what we have said about anatomy, will not avoid falling into error by which many men have died, as I have seen too many of those, because they are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	When a doctor was called to see a woman who had developed an abscess of the neck, and had also injured some arteries in the neck causing great blood loss, resulting in the woman dying among her companions.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And another doctor saw a man who had been stabbed with a stone from a house that had been built, and the stone was large, and it came to him and removed that stone from his body through a small incision, so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And he had already been called to extract that, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, it was known that she would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And another doctor took the salary of a duke from our land for surgery, and went to an experienced blacksmith who was skilled in setting bones; and because of his ignorance, the doctor removed the fracture, on the plate, with pins and nails with strong structure, and did not allow the bone to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then gradually remove the bandage according to his wishes, and then remove the dressing, and then the leech for several days and nights, and command that we remove the bandage; and this is when the wound and the foot become infected, and reach a dangerous state.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And then apply it to him, and prepare to remove the bandage, and thus achieve peace and relieve his pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, if corruption was already confirmed in the member, so that it could not be controlled, and did not cease to spread the corruption in the member until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And then another doctor who punctured an abscess and made it ulcerated after several days, until the fire magnified the malice of it to the Lord of it.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of which is that the cranium is pure of melancholic humor, so that it does not reach the patient with all the iron, but rather that the member which suffers be held from all.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	For this reason, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation should be divided into two parts: one in the operation that is associated with health, and the other in the work that is performed in the major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	I have already existed in this place where the operation is performed, where there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard that and lay down that one, so that the people do not approach to speak to you and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons with solicitude and protection of God, and your patients with success and stability.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way for the grace of God to lead to salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay down those terrible diseases of difficult healing, and let your weapons be in that which makes you fear, so that your situation in your faith and in your name does not escape from you: because more remains to your glory, and more in the world and more behind your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	In some of its symptoms, it causes swelling in certain parts of the body.
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not heal the patient incorrectly, because misguided doctors may not recognize it.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already dedicated this book according to three titles.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The beginning of the division of the book, and the first of the first section.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered by the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the irons of cautery, and of what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second section.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on dryness and puncture, and on ventosas, and on plagues, and on the extraction of sage and similar things to those, all chapter ordered by the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third section.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and on dislocation, and on the cure of tortion and similar things to those; chapter ordered by the foot, and by the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of sharp cautery and sharp medicine and memory of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that chapter begins the treatise on all the free.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	That you know the quality of those handles of that cautery and of its sheaths, and in what condition it is prohibited to use cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the speech about the quality of the handle of cautery and its sheath is a long and elaborate and subtle for knowledge, and secretly hidden; and from there they have spoken much about secrets, and because of it they have disagreed, and to me it has been a short part of their speeches, I am afraid of length.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery compares to the whole complete condition universally, which is matter or its matter, except for two conditions, which are conditions of the tail, which is matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the condition of the tail and dry matter, they disagree; because one said that cautery is suitable for that, and the others said the opposite of that, that cautery is not convenient in illness which is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that illness tail and dry matter that is caut and dry be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And tell that person who says the opposite of that, that cauterization is greatly beneficial in all kinds of illness and dryness that is seen in the bodies of men, because when you compare the bodies of men to the humidity of fire, the bodies of men are wet.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the word of that person, that I have experienced this myself several times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I do not know that there is someone who has experienced this already and has been trained in the capital of cauterization through previous exercise, and has known the diversity of the appearance of men and the disposition of their illnesses, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the span of time for those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other appearances, you should not be afraid, and especially in illnesses that are wet and humid, because all doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree in the benefit of cauterization in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And you should know, children, that the secret of healing by fire and the goodness of it, is that cauterization is simple, because the action of it only reaches the member that is cauterized and not to the other member that is adjusted with it, unless it causes a small harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the action of medicine burn through to that part of the body which is affected by it, and it often brings relief to the sick member and is often used for difficult healing and often causes pain.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	May the fire, due to its greatness and goodness of substance, not do this, but rather, it is known by us through experiment and long experience in the study of the art on the truth of causes; and for this reason you are excused from the length of the sermon. And if not, then it would not be understood at all in this pause to you secretly hidden away with the fire, and the quality of the operation of which in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels evils, is a philosophical demonstrative speech, which would be sharpened in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, my sons, that they should not forget the time in which it is convenient to make a cautery and they should wait for the best time of primeval morning.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage caused by time is submerged in the jubilant joy of which is thrown with the cautery, and more so if the cautery is for pain or necessary painful ones, quickly and forcefully, the ones that do not suffer delay because it is feared of those that come malicious, which is greater than small damage entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And do not catch in your feet, or, sons, that is only appreciated by the common people and foolish doctors, because that illness that is cured with cauterization is not always effective for a long time, and they stop that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not that they seek for that, because cauterization is only a matter of medicine which alters the appearance and dries out the moisture which is the cause of the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But it is often used for cauterization above medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that its illness returns in some time of the time, according to the appearance of the patient and the location of its illness, and its virtue, and that which is prepared in the body of the patient from the aggregation of superfluities in it, and that which is obtained by it in the acquisition of foods and similar causes; but the illness in which cauterization is administered is a subtle illness of a few members of superfluities and moisture, like a tooth cautery for pain and similar to that, possible is that in it does not return that pain, but that which is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And more commonly, people believe that the pointed cautery is the last resort of medicine, and they think that there is no cure that can be achieved with medicine or any other cause before using the pointed cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is the opposite of that; and they understand that the pointed cautery is the last resort of medicine only when administering methods of treatment in some diseases, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause, they administer homeopathy, and it works for that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here, people believe that the pointed cautery is the last resort of medicine, but they understand it in a different way than what I understand as a common person and too many foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that gold is better than iron for cauterizing, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the location of cauterizing does not matter, because it is not absolutely true, for I have seen some people who are very good and others who are not, and cauterizing with gold is better than with iron, but rather when you do cauterizing with fire and gold, it is not up to your declaration, because it depends on the quantity that you want to use, and because it prepares to receive the heat of the gold, and if you adjust over the fire, the gold melts for the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for that, a pointed cautery of iron is made lighter and more conveniently and more directly to the direction of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter in the second chapter of the cautery, and have ordered those between the feet, so that the muleteer asks him what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of the cautery for head pain caused by cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery is caused by moisture and cold on the most common accident of which these causes are the cause of many traumatic fluxes, called crisis, from the head to the parts of the arms and legs fluent, and many sleep, and of tooth pain and the gums, and universally of all evil that comes from cold, such as paralysis, hardness and apoplexy, and similarities in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first commands the patient to be evacuated with a laxative medicine for the head, for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and his age and his custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command the one who is shaving his own head to do so between your hands on a chair that you have placed, and place your hands over his chest to prevent him from falling.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the back of your hand on the shaving razor near the nose between his fingers.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, since the place you mentioned on your body has been reached, sign that location and then apply the pointed cautery made of olive oil, which is in this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that on the location well and apply it gently, so that it does not hurt too much at once, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then raise your hand slightly and look at the location, and if you see that some amount of bone has been exposed, as much as the amount of grain, then raise your hand, and if it does not return, place your hand on that iron, or another one, if it is cooled, before it is seen from the bone what I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small piece of salt and dissolve it on the location and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your hand on the wound that has been opened in the border and leave that over the entrance where the skin of the fire should be destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the four-pharmacon ointment into the wound to make it heal.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that as long as the plague is open, the more it gets better and more useful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say that the cord should be cauterized inside the bone, and it should be held with the cauterizer until some part of the bone is burned.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove that which has been stuck to the bone, and then heal it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they say that the cauterizer should reach the back, until it reaches the strong part of the bone where the bone breaks, and this is the way to puncture the little heel:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate that from that wound the vapors of the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then healed until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these two types of cautery used in all men, except on those who are second in line due to fear; and if that one leaves, then it is better for the sake of his health when it is, because the head is revealed by the solution of continuity of which he has with the other members, and more so when the head of the patient is of naturally fragile nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first type of cautery is more saving and better for me; and from that one, and from the other work, it is for the sake of his health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When the whole head is affected by chronic and long-lasting pain, and this is prolonged in the patient, and uses of garlic and of charcoal and of capipurges and of ointments and of bandages and of sweats and of gallipots and of similars, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery which they have and do not know how to apply to it again from those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and not fragile and atrophied, then that cautery applies another one after that one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that on the surface of his head with a pointed cautery where the skin is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the skin and expose the bone to the extent that we have found it, and cauterize that with a pointed cautery in the part behind the head where it is called the mastoid process, — and that is the place where the pillow is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And let your hand rest there, and do not expose the bone, because the patient will suffer great pain from that, different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say that this cauterization is in that place, because it is the cautery that is used to cauterize the tips of the head and the back of the head, which is a more subtle cauterization than the one that is used to cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the ancient non-anterior cauterization.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the pain is severe in the part of the head, or it penetrates to the eye, let the doctor administer the remedies that make the head better, and administer the other cure, which I have mentioned in the treatises on illnesses; and if none of these help, then the cauterization is done in two ways: either with a sharp cautery or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May the pointed cautery be used as you take a lancet and prick that area and apply a bandage to its extremities to stop the bleeding.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then incise the location of the pain in the temple with a blade that is inserted into the place where it is located, until it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply pressure over the stopped bleeding with a bandage that is tightly compressed, and leave it for three hours; and then remove the lancet, and let the wound heal for two or three days, and then apply a poultice on the affected area until the place stops bleeding.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that one until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do that with some burning remedies that I have written in the other treatise on burning remedies.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cauterization be done in this way: light the cautery with the following method:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a "claw hammer" because its head has the form of a carnation in which there is some curvature, and at the middle part of it is a small projection.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand on the location of the pain, and retrieve your hand - so that the wound is not stuck with the bandage that has been left - and turn the small iron at high speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of blood that is stuck due to the type of cloth is such that it covers most of the patient, and lift your hand to prevent the artery from being stuck with the bandage that has been left, so that there is no bleeding.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a salted water dressing on that location, and leave it for three days; and then apply a wet dressing, and then heal with an ointment as soon as it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cauterize the end of the knife according to the cautery, and be careful not to cut the artery in this situation properly.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the ancient cautery of the emigration.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an emigration with the remedy we have mentioned in the previous cure, and the remedy we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and if you do not improve the cure, and see that the disease does not respond to the first cauterization with medicine or the cauterization with fire, then cover the cauterization of the knife before it becomes bright, so that it means over the location of the pain with a long line of the same length as the one you have used; and place your hand firmly between the incision and the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is often damaged during mastication, and that the jaw not be held too tightly and the nerves that may be affected, and that nothing happens.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the guard and care of the flow of blood from an artery that is abscised, which in the abscission of which there is fear, and more so for those who do not know what to do and are not studious; and leave the operation until the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you should remember the rule of the flow of blood from an artery according to your method, in its own place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this evil that does not allow this cautery and sees the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle location of the head as we have reported, and cure the wound before it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter of stretching of an artery having two points, and this cauterization is better and more suitable.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cauterization of gout pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the big toe occurs due to cold humors and is treated with laxatives and the other treatment mentioned in the previous section, but the pain does not disappear, then use the cautery without making points, and this is the one that has no name, of which the following is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then use the pointed cautery, and bring it close to the flame, and place it around the entire big toe as if it were rotating, or in the circle of each joint if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	While applying the cautery to the edge of the big toe, gently press it into the place where it hurts.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery touches all the big toe, and it is painful, then quickly treat the affected areas before they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cauterization of torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture that is cured and treated with cauterization is only of the specific kinds that come from inflammation, as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid the use of a dry or spasm-inducing cautery on the sensitive area.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that area of turmoil with jelly, purgatives, and worm medicine, and do not compare your treatment, then you should cauterize the patient with three cautery points: the first at the end of the golden hair, the second a little below their temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your hand on the opposite side of the affected area, as softening only occurs in the healthy part.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cautery application is that you cauterize that area with the cautery at the end of the golden hair, a little above the corner of the cap, and on the temple, the longest one being second to the length of the previously mentioned point, and place your hand inside before the quantity of the main part of the coda is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is specific to the knife, the shape of which is given in the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	May it be, however, that there is also a more subtle cause in the abundance of excess grease.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then care for the area with the procedure until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the ancient cautery for apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When ancient apoplexy is treated with the procedure we have mentioned and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on all parts of the head; and with a cauterizer at the middle of the head, as we have mentioned; and with a cauterizer in the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The method of the cauterizer is done as it is mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and more behind; and then care for the area with the procedure.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of the cautery for forgetfulness caused by flatulence.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Gave the patient large and tasteful pills at the beginning of the treatment.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then remove the entire cap from the patient and place it on the described plaster in the treatise of plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And place some cautery, which is a sign of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Do this second according to the method that has already been mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if those methods are successful; and if not, then make three cauterizations on the back part of his head, which should be placed from the most superior part of the head towards the most inferior part of the head.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place the largest part of the above between each cauterization, and then cure the cauterized area with the method that is used.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you feel additional pain and the patient is tolerating it, then make the cauterization in the middle location; and if you feel greater pain, then cauterize that one on both feet.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then cure it until it is healed; and the cauterization should be made according to the form given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cautery of the perineum and softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Having already processed in the softening of the head and neck, and with that which we have said; then shave the patient's head, and then apply the pointed cautery at the middle of the head, and apply the cautery over all the joints of the head, and apply the cautery on the back part of it, and three cautery on the spines of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the patient's condition of softening of the body, and if the patient tolerates three cautery, and if the condition is strong, then apply four cautery over the spines of the back, and afterwards apply the cautery inside where the tail of the patient comes out, and raise the hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then care for that until it is healed, and this cautery should be made with olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cautery of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is by flexibility.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, it is necessary to modify the patient's brain at the beginning of their illness and on the other side, the cure that we have said in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then give them gourds and mustard plasters to the servant who modifies, giving them this for several days, good benefit of the foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that with a cauterizer at the middle of the back of the head according to the previous method, and with another cauterizer in the occiput of them, and over each corner of the head cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates, then cauterize that with cauterizers which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body over the spines of the neck and the spines of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And if it is a cauterizer as it has been said before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then place cauterizers gently according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of Cautery for Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted moisture and flatulent gas, then cautery is applied to those parts which we have mentioned in the book.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and tends towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink that which cleanses his brain according to the water that has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and make a small incision decently on the top of his head over the circle, and place your hand on that spot.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be laid down, and held from all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then place a liniment; and it is worthy of being boiled with ancient wool fat.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And scald that over the fire for warming, prepared by measure, which the patient says is sufficient when it is enough in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then apply that in the middle spot of his head over the circle, and let it enter him until it is dissolved.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And apply that to the patient every week for the entire week until they are healed; or if you wish, make small points with a cautery according to the most appropriate part of the body, but always hold the hand with a moistened cotton swab: this is a special type of cautery that hydrates the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And place your hand on that swollen area in the form of a border or in grayish-white color.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	About the application of descending water cautery on the belly.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared to you that the beginning of water application on the belly by means of syringes, as I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient that which will cleanse the head of the body, and keep that from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that which is washed in hot water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command the patient to shave their own head, and make points with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then make points with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of water application in two bellies, or on one side if it is the beginning of water application in one belly.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incision with the cautery all the veins and arteries that are behind the neck; and those in that area on the side of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of blood flow when it is cauterized; and if you see blood flow from there, stop it with some medicine, which is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And if you find knowledge of the kind that is in the extraction of arteries and the removal of those and caution about blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some veins are cauterized in the neck behind two bones and two cautery recently produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of ancient lacrimals.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the lacrimals of the forehead are very old and through the veins and arteries that are in that place clearly and it is verified that this is superfluous, then cauterize that with the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water accumulation in the forehead, and the cautery in the middle of the head and two cautery in the neck behind two temples, and two cautery in the neck behind two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if it is necessary to make an incision, then cauterize that area in the entire length of the neck on the tip of the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization of bad odor from the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that person with the method we mentioned in the division and have not yet completed your treatment, then prepare and give the patient three doses of bread; and remove their cap, and cauterize the area with a thinner or thicker cautery, depending on the situation.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that area with a small needle between the two upper eyelids, under the eyebrows.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that area.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the needle cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cauterization for the softening of the eyelids.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a moon-shaped cautery; and this is its form.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, using a small pointed cautery, make points on the two upper eyelids in all parts, and extend them from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the upper eyelid.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand too much on the cautery, but according to the quantity that the sticky part of the eyelid is attached.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Concerning the cautery of the eyelid when the hairs become converted into the parts inside and poke the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eyelid become converted into the parts inside and poke the eye, cautery is done in those places according to two methods, either by burning or by medical means.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cautery is done with fire, command the patient to hold those hairs that are similar to those that are shaved, until they are prolonged and equal; and if it pokes his eye, then strengthen the eyelids of that eye with a bandage so that it does not become infected until the hairs have grown.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore, when they are born and grown, pause the patient's head on your shoulder, and then place your hand over their eyelids with a second tent, which should be in the shape of a fan of mercury, and the beginning of the tent near their ears.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place a cool cloth or moistened cotton on their eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then remove the cautery that has this shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize the shape that was placed, little by little, in waves, until the surface of the eyeball, which is like a fan of mercury, is completely burned.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And to ensure the healing of the eye work, you should see that the eyelid is already contracted and the ears of the eye are raised for the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave it on that for three days, and then place the cloth over it until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then take care to remove that which is unhealthy until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	However, if it returns through the eyes due to some cause and the eyelid becomes softened, then do so with another pointed cautery on that spot as you had done previously.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	However, if the eyes are in the eyelid, then cauterize that which is inside and raised to its natural place and equalized so that the eyes do not push it out.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	However, if the pointed cautery is not available, command the patient to look at the eyes while they are prolonged and equalized, and then make a shape of paper or cloth in the form of a funnel.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take some known wool and live worms, and mix those causes with beeswax, and make that into a poultice so that it is not scattered; and then spread that over the paper which is made as mentioned above, and place that on one of the eyelids; and place the other eyelid on a flat surface in a bowl of water, and let the head of the patient be in an upright position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Pause the medicine over the patient and press it gently into them so that the patient does not feel the bite of the medicine, which is like a burning fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so, as the patient persists with the biting pain, press the medicine into them again and give it to them; once the pain ceases, remove the medicine and wash the affected area with clean water; then consider whether the eyelid has already been raised as if it were washed from the constraint of fire or incision, for that is well; and if not, return to the previous step of the medicine on the place where the medicine has not yet pressed in and does not become damaged before your operation is completed and is contrary to the affected area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then pause over the patient's side near the border until the code of the adhesion is eradicated, and then cure that with the ointment or another remedy until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to guard your operation that you keep the medicine from falling out of the affected area, and if the eyelid approaches too quickly and some cause of the hairs pushing into the affected area, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, and usually as you did at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the herb of myrtle.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the feet of men are varied according to their size and shape, so you make your adjustment accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	Do not obstruct the straight path to that which is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the foot.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula of this kind, do not follow the method we have described in the sections on diseases, but rather cauterize it in this way: command the patient to tilt their head towards you, and hold their head at an angle between your hands in such a way that it is not too high or too low.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a cotton pad soaked in alcohol or a mucilage of poppy seeds on the foot of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is straight or shaped like a cane or penis of the vulva, at one end of which the pointed cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, it should penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to draw out, use a tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But the one that is straight is better for the intended purpose.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then press the fistula if it is opened, and drain out the pus and dry it up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then open it and extract the pus from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place your hand over the cautery which is hot, and hold it away from the patient's face and the part of the nose, so that your hand or the patient is not burned, and then place the cautery on the gray matter of the brain and corrupt it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of the treatment the cautery goes through the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and leave that there for three days, and then place your hand over that and around the area until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If they have been suffering for several days and have not healed, then pause the sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered and scraped according to what is appropriate in its own chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterizing the fistula which was first described as follows: enter the place of the fistula and make that, and then place your hand in that fissure which is the shape of the wound; and put on that amount of one ounce of lead; and with your hand hold it well for retention, and do not let the patient be burned by the lead so that it does not reach the bottom of that; and cover that you place over the patient's wound with albumen of egg or water, where the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by wonderful cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed by what we have said about cauterization and cure, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a nasal douche and reduce the fistula to the nose according to its own location when it comes.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cautery of the wound in the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Women often get tears in their labia, and especially in those of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those tears with the cautery that we have mentioned in divisions and do not apply your treatment, then use the small pointed cautery of this form:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And its hollow is according to the thinness of a spoon.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that instrument carefully into those tears until the cautery reaches the edge of the tears.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with the cautery until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the uvula or on the palate or in the gums, an abscess forms and becomes hard, and then it is broken, and then it becomes old, and then it is hard again, and a fistula forms, and then you treat it and do not apply your treatment, then use the cautery according to the quantity that has been reabsorbed in the fistula, and then put that hot into the mouth of the fistula, and then place your hand inside until the hot iron reaches the edge of it, and then make a small incision or two; and then treat it with the cautery that we have mentioned for treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the sinus is removed and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and treat the corrupted bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of the extraction of teeth and the melting of the jaws.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the jaws are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, then pause the patient's head on your thigh, and place the hot cautery in the shape that will be used, holding the cup over the tooth and inserting it into the cavity of the cautery burning vigorously, until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient closes their mouth with salt water and holds it for an hour, as the loose tooth is closed, the softened jaw is strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cautery for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or there is frost or worms in it, and the medicine does not provide relief, then cautery can be used in two ways: with a cautery made of cow's horn, or with a cauterizing iron.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The cautery made of cow's horn is to take a piece of cow's horn and melt it in the fire, then take a cotton cloth and wrap it around the end of the probe, and quickly insert that into the tooth that hurts, pausing it over the painful tooth until it is frostbitten.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse wool or cotton in the horn below, and place that over the painful tooth, and place that over the ignited iron until the iron reaches the end of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	When using the pointed cautery to cauterize, you wait for the right moment when it is hot enough, and if there is any rust on it or if the heat does not reach the patient's mouth, then do not use it.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the pointed cautery in the shape it will take, and place that on the tooth, and your hand over it until the cautery is extinguished; and do this several times so that the pain remains or on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And cover that the patient closes his own mouth with good border and holds it for an hour, and then scrape it off; this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize where you can reach with your hand.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the needle:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cauterization of hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are flexible and affected by humors and do not obey digestion by medicines and you want to make them more firm, then ignite the cautery in the shape that is this following, having two extremities so that the smoke from the cautery can pass through the other extremity, and place that on the abscess a few times, and if it needs it, until the point of the cautery reaches the center of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then pause the cauterizer according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it for three days and place it over the affected area in boiling water until it has been completely burned by the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the ointment and try to wrap it with cloth until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the cannula or cautery for such is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of the cauterization of a wart on the nose and its contraction.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes over the lower part of the lung, and especially when it is accompanied by coldness, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that place on the abdomen where the pain is.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to touch the cautery on the abdomen or burn the intestine of the patient, but a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that place with another cautery at the joint of the neck on the lower spine of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the pointed cautery should be used in the same way as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of that thing that was previously put in until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cauterization of the patient's lungs and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by humid humors, and the patient does not have fever or tisane, and it is an old disease, then cauterize that thing with two pointed cauteries on the furcula in the locations where the lungs are deflated; and another pointed cautery in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and use the pointed cautery as before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, your cauterization should be done with the pointed cautery called puncta, whose form was previously described in the punctation of gout.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And their points should enter those; and then take care of that thing that was previously put in until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the pointed cautery should have three points for this cauterization: you can make three pointed cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cauterization of the nipple, which is the help of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the helper's nipple is dislocated due to excessive lubrication and not stopped at its return time, it should be returned before it returns to that state, and with a small movement it can be adjusted as needed, as we have testified, first reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient over on their back or on their side; and raise the codex which is in the part of the nipple towards the upper parts of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated in that direction.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then light the cautery which has two heads; and this is the shape of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the codex until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come from four heads of cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply it according to the amount of pain; and this is the shape of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Sometimes, according to this count, and because they are the cautery .viii.,
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place your hand over the cautery poorly cut wounds with salt, and then make the patient comfortable so that the limb is not painful for a while until it is relieved.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and below and has been made like that, then cauterize over the muscle with a clavilh or pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .xxvi.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is bile and moisture inside the stomach that multiplies in it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment and do not confirm it, then you should place the patient on their back, extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize that area with three cautery: one cautery placed at the chest for the quantity of a pointed clavilh, and two cautery placed on the sides of the cautery, forming the figure of a triangular cauteri; and extend between those that are not adjusted to make a puncture.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the thickness of the two thirds of the codpiece of the gown.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if the shape of the cautery is according to this form, it adds up. And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cautery in the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach is punctured at the point where this cautery frightens, then place your hand over the stomach according to the amount you want to test, and cauterize that with a cautery at the points; and cure that with the remedy that is prescribed before it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cauterization of the foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain arises in the foot due to coldness or moisture or heavy wind before it has reached its normal complexity by excessive exit, and the patient is cured with the remedy that we have said and not otherwise, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back, and place your hand over the area three times according to this form and this amount lies over the foot below the ribs, which is the position of a man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the greatest length of the said cautery, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straightened.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Do not trust the cautery too much.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of water that is adhered to the amount of the main part of the cotton, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet; and if he is not standing, then extend his limbs and lift his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And you may use these cauteries as a pointed cautery when you have skill and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overdo it in the cauterization, and let the main part of the cotton be adhered to the body so that the whole body and reach into the intestines, because the cotton here is subtle; and you know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of puncturing abscess on the thigh with a pointed cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When the inflammation or abscess in the thigh has ended and one wants to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the thigh or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the thigh, the patient's weight and pain are increased.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the membrane of the thigh, then the pain is greatly increased and often wearies the doctors with its treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be turned on their side; and then cover the location of the abscess with a tent; and then ignite the cautery that is shaped like a needle, the shape of which was previously described on the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize it with that and ignite the cautery into the wound until the entire sinew is boiled, until it reaches the fascia, until it escapes from the bone.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that by treatment of the other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cauterization unless the one studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in which most people have known to cause harm; but this pointed cautery has been tried for some time on this operation, however it is better to leave that to us, and it is more reliable.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cauterization of the plantar surface.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauterizations of the soles of the feet were made in this manner, and this is the one you should take from the writings of Hippocrates, a long dry needle that is found, and it is of the largest size of the same.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that one in oil and place the other one on the fire, and then cauterize at that location where it is between the continuity of the scapula and the collar; and with two small needles, one slightly declining to the part that was left by the beard, and two more in that which is declining between the fifth rib and the cizena, declining a little to the parts behind; and another cauterization at the middle of the chest; and three cauterizations of the parts behind; and one cauterization at that location where it is between the two scapulas, and two more on the sides of the chest, after the cauterization that is between the two scapulas.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not let your hand touch the pointed cautery, but keep it in the manifest direction of the wound in the work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they also said that ancient people who were familiar with men who used cauteries similar to rays and ignited them, and put them in the location between the ribs, until they reached that pus and it was removed, as we have said about the abscess of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this puncture, the cauteries do not cause much fear, because it has already happened many times in the location of the fistula that does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery of the malleolus.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the patient's ankle, do not compare your cure with what we have said about the division, but rather apply the cautery in three ways, all of which are corrective, one of which is to make three cauteries or four lines according to the length of the ankle according to the figure of the cauteries of the foot, the figure of which has been preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let there be a large enough amount of the cautery or a little more, and the handle of the cautery should be the same handle as the one we have mentioned in the cautery of the foot equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not place your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their side.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to cauterize, which is that you ignite the cautery having two points, which we have mentioned in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the cord which is at the end of the muscle on the left side of the patient.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be the one that lifts the cord according to the length of the body, so that the points are made at the appropriate latitude of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two points, ignite one, in the moment when those penetrate the cord of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus four points are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with a cautery having three points.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you should cure the pointed cautery so that it does not cause pain for too many days, because it is more harmful than the other previous causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cauterization of hydropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries should not be used in hydropsy, but rather in the proper place.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydropsy, follow the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the previous division and do not compare your treatment with others. Then, place four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, another on the chest, another on the belly, two between the spine, and one on the right side of the chest, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cauterization in place for as long as necessary to cause pain.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not remove the patient from treatment while the cauterization is in place, because it is beneficial for the two understandings, and it should be fastened to the patient's body as an aid to healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the pointed cautery used to cauterize the belly is like a claw, according to the form above, and the one used to cauterize the back is like an olive, according to its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter thirty-two.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cauterization of the feet and the spaces.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are infected with hydrops and filled with water sitrina, cover them with a cloth and cauterize the feet on the back of the foot, between the ear and the annular, and elevate your hand over the cautery and do not twist it; then elevate your hand and do not return to that, because the water sitrina evaporates.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	And the cautery should be made in this way: And on both spaces make two cauteries, and in each space make a cautery at the end of the cautery cutlery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be made according to the length of the space: and one end above the fold and the other below the middle of the space; and two cauteries on each space.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time to allow some fluid to drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then care for those causes that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of the cautery of wounds in the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When wounds in the belly are caused by friction and humidity entering the intestines, the digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines, are cured in this way and not by other methods, and sometimes patients suffer from a strong cautery of virtue exhibiting, then cauterize that with a large cautery over their stomach according to what was previously mentioned in the cautery of the stomach, with the cauteri of the circle and with four cautery en the circumference of the subtle abdomen, with the subtle clavilh cautery; and with the cautery over the alcatin on alozis great, or with two cautery.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the humidity exuding and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize that over the pentenilh and over the intestines, and strongly adjust two cautery over the stomach and near the inguinals, which is a perfect cure for the quality that you should not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in their natural state or filled with thick humors that have infiltrated them or corrupted by moisture, and they are cured by the method we have mentioned in the division and not by the other curative method, then cauterize them with three cauteries on the surface of the lower back, and with two similar ones above the navel.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the stomach of the patient and the food of the patient has not been digested, and the face of the patient is inflamed, then cauterize that one on the stomach with a large cauteri as mentioned before; and with one cauteri on the chest, and with another cauteri on the side of the patient's body, holding the cauteri for some time, and cure the patient before it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of an abscess near its opening.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the lancet, then extinguish the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Approach that burning lancet into the lancet you removed, and finally place your hand over the area until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, if they are too painful, then cauterize each of them one by one after you have recovered, and finally care for those that you gave them from the saliva until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is more dangerous in jest.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in nature between their parts.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when someone has a fistula in nature that is formed, and it is old, clean out the rotten humidities from it, and then apply something that is more suitable than cobwebs to that area, and know the quantity of its depth with the previously mentioned needle.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Approach the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And approach that lit cautery to this fistula, and insert the probe according to the amount in which it enters.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat over that with the cautery going in which those corrupt flesh is burned away quickly one time or two or three, according to the amount of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the corpus of the bladder or the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do that unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And cure the place where it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and those matters are removed from it, and they remain there for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if those matters are not removed from it or remain there, then know that it is penetrating or in the beginning of it corroding, or that thing comes from those causes of which you will remember mention in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter thirty-seven.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cauterization of the heels.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain occurs in the heels due to cold or rough friction, and the patient's mouth is closed, then cautiously cauterize that one on the heel with a pointed cautery on each heel, using a needle of which you should remember the removal.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And if it is very painful to cauterize them immediately, then wait a little while, so that three cautery lines will come, and they will be more effective later on.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter thirty-eight.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is a debilitating and softening of the bladder due to friction and moisture, so that the patient cannot hold the urine, then cauterize that one on the part where the urethra is, with a needle like those of the pentenilh, and cauterize with one cautery in the middle, and another on the side of it.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of toes; and cauterize that pointed cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cautery if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery needle should be according to what is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	About the cauterization of the shoulder.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is cold and humidity in the shoulder, and pressure is prohibited, and the ligaments of it are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and they cause pain due to their presence, then it is necessary that this place be cauterized with three cautery around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a pointed cautery over the back, or with two cautery, and let the cautery needle be.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	About the cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When cold moisture is infiltrated into the part of the elbow, and it causes its dislocation from its place, and it is stretched on the other when compared to each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is in the area where the pain is.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should cauterize the patient on the affected area of their body with a pointed cautery, as you would in the circumference of the area, to prevent the area from falling to the wrong side of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery used should be in the shape of the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then use three pointed cauteries made of large olive wood.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the cautery should be made according to the thickness of the entire chain; and then take care that it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the affected area, and its cause is that it has been frozen and moistened, the patient is cured with what we have said and not confused, and this is ancient, then you should remove the patient from heavy humors by using foul or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The handle of the cautery in that case has two types: a cautery with medicinal fire, or a cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The second type of handle is known, which is one that cauterizes the part of the heel with three triangular cautery in this form and makes them with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery is the thickness of the oil or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some wounds are made on the back of the head above the neck for there are four cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize around the circle that precedes the form in the dislocation of the shoulder, and the circle contains and burns the entire shoulder blade.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the method of cautery in that case when pain is adhered to the shoulder and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cautery on the thigh over the area where the patient is in pain; and one cautery on the calf for four called a few of the left side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery for the elbow, and the depth of the cautery according to the thickness of the skin.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient feels that the pain is spreading into the area of the feet, then cautery those points here where you apply the pointed cautery with three or four points or more if necessary from that point.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient feels pain behind the knee and on the cushion, then cautery that point here with an elbow cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cautery that you do not burn the nerves or great arteries, and that for that reason it may cause harm to the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have also seen other cases where they cautery on the scalp and then burned in the cautery, and the bed was inflated with fire before the tumor was achieved, and fire perforated and corrupted all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then apply that to death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two parts at once, then cauterize each one separately.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise say in the cauterization of any cauterizer, this is the method: make it similar to a circle of iron that its circumference is the length of one palm; and its diameter should be according to the thickness of a date or about an inch.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let that circle be another third; and its spaces should be the amount of the width of a finger; and those circles should be placed in two parts; and its length should be one or two fingers, and make them in those iron edges well prepared in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then let it be heated in the fire until it glows and gives off sparks, and then place it on the part of the one who is lying down, the patient facing up.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that with three cauterizations in a row.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And leave that for three days; apply ointment to that wound and leave it uncovered for three days; and then cure it with an egg yolk before it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Dear sons, of this type of cautery we have not used it much because of the fear of its effects on the body, and because of the few that we have found which are harmful to the body.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Of the many who have suffered from this, the place where it is located is found.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Many doctors adhere to the method that you make two circles with an armed needle perforated in which the hook of the iron door is placed; the length of the edge should be two nuts or those that are on them.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between them is equal to the thickness of the said hook; and it is placed above and below, and it contains what is between them in this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand on the part of the skin where the patient is lying, and cover the patient with a cloth; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that water should be like small fire, and let it boil for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient to bite and stick to it — because that bite is like fire — until the bite ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and remove all the water from the tailbone using clean water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave it for three days and place your hand over that border where the black spot of the abscess remains, and leave it like that for several days, and then drain it; this is usually done.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of it with clean water until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the thigh or chest, then make it in the same state as it was in the water when it was made in the water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way of water tailbone, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and of caustic not extinguished from some anodyne parts one, and draw it out in a new wave of which the part left behind is perforated by a small tube according to the quantity that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of the other wave in a boiled water, and pour over that alkali and live caustic of clean water the amount that those take by a certain name, and put it on them with good compression, and leave the rest of the water that remains in the part left behind in the boiled water.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all of that water, and pour it over another living cause and another renewed alkali, which is currently very strong, the one that is administered in certain medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, which operation is done with fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And of the medicines some are cauterized with which, such as tartar and acid, and cause a sore in any part that is mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Galen reported of a man from the ancients the operation and the cure that is cured pain in all parts and sciatica vein, and magnified how it was of that one, and said that no other cure was needed, and that it was healed by a method such as this, which is very effective.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be near certain green leaves, and if not green leaves, it should be taken fresh figs; and the one that is to be used should be crushed with a few grains of salt and placed on the water in which the pain is, or in the cushion, or in the chest, and tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it be left for three hours or until the patient feels relieved from the attack of the disease.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place that on his back and when the body of the patient is uncoiled, introduce that into the ground, where the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And you should know that no one should use this cautery for these remedies, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May also Escolides say that when a goat's wound has been made in the vein stretcher, it is applied to the wound; and this cautery is made like this: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the foot of the foot and the hollow.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat's wound and inflame it with fire until it is burned to charcoal; and place it on the wool and let it be stretched through.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat that, and do not stop doing that until the sensation of the bite reaches the whole body and the pain is relieved.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cautery is called a cattle cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cautery for two pains.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes the pain in the back is caused by too many causes, such as by pressure or by impact or by excessive excretion, and by causes similar to those, by the infusion of wet and moist matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery does not fit in this single species that is made for the infusion of moist matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, before evacuation of the patient, make drugs that are similar to them, which are made on their back in the place where the pain is three lines wide, rather than trying with a cautery or more, according to the amount of tolerance of the patient and the effectiveness of it.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And this cautery is made with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cautery with three or four pointed cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of cauterization at the beginning of gout.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Children are often afflicted with this disease; and it is said that it occurs in them due to their structure, elevation, and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And usually in the lower spine of the back and in the hips, which begin to overshadow the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see that and want to prevent it, then use this pointed cautery in the form of a circle:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that holds the cautery over every part of the spine equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want to, cauterize in the circle of the spine with two or three lines of the pointed cautery.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then care for the area until it is healed with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that cauterization should not be administered in gout that is caused by spasm of the nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, if gout is cured by the method of cure and the pain does not subside, then perform another cauterization.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you should cauterize that area near the joint of the foot with a pointed cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain spreads to the other joints, and that does not subside, then perform three or four cauterizations on each ankle with this pointed cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if more cauterizations are needed, then perform them with the cautery, but do not press too hard on your hand around the tip of the cautery.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain can enter the mouth and throat, then administer the cautery that we mentioned in its previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the hands and it is called sausage fingers, then make points around the knuckles as they rotate, make points on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the mentioned places, then make points around each knuckle and on the back of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain can reach the shoulders or muscles, then cauterize all the joints of the assistants.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not expel the patient from good regimen and reception of medicines, because if good regimen is followed, flatulence will be expelled by this cautery, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of the cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the fracture is in the joints and the intestines are pushing against the belly, and this begins to happen, then tell the patient to lie on their side and use a soft cushion so that the wound does not open from their belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then place the patient on your lap, and command them to hold their breath as soon as they feel pain or see the cautery or intestine coming out.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that cautery to its place, and try to mend the breakage on the side of the pentenilh, where the end is similar to the majority of the parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery in this form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	as soon as it is ready, and throw sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on that side where your hand is, and hold it in the right position, and as soon as you have reached the other side of the pentenilh; and repeat that other procedure if you have not succeeded in the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe the position of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, so as not to burn the patient because if it comes out under the patient, it may cause death or other great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you have the cautery, do not press the bone, do not perform your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And be aware that the cautery for children should be thin according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And after three days, care for the location of the cautery until the wound is healed from the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And after caring for those wounds, care for the other injuries until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should remain on their back for 40 days before the wound is sealed and the plague passes.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And be aware that the patient's food should be given according to the length of time of their healing, which will help to flatten their belly, and that the intestine should not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And after 40 days, administer appropriate food, and keep the patient on that diet for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And if they are tired from labor and repletion of food and drink, and from strong voices, because when they use this regimen for complete recovery, the entire body is healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I say the cure for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, and if they do not heal, then cauterize the rupture with a red-hot iron according to the size of it, and that which is extracted from the wound should be done away with as the clean part of it; and cure that which we have said, and do not adjust it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And it has been said that the first rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than with a needle.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is placed that is perpendicular to the width of the rupture, and another line above; and place your hand with a clavihus cautery, but the first cautery is more slender and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cautery for torticollis.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When the limbs are bent or struck by pain that persists for a long time and does not respond to medical treatment, then it is customary to apply cautery with a pointed instrument.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery of each member should be according to its size and location, and its virtue and development, and the location of the torticollis and pain of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If it is healed by the first cautery, good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it; because of the nature of those pains, they are often caused by a member that approaches the affected one, so that you can obtain those cauteries within that patient before they are healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of cautery for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some scars are treated with cautery for a great benefit, and especially if the type of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so, when you want to cauterize that one, consider whether the leprosy is common and has been cured with what we have said in the division and not given, nor is it, and fear that the corruption comprehends all of his body and all of his appearance, then cauterize that one on the head with a pointed cautery: one at the middle of the head, and the second behind him, facing the front of his hair; and the others on two ears; and one behind, on the nape or back.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, your hand should be placed near the bone with a small pressure, and from there the scales are displaced, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from him; and cauterize on the meat according to what is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then cover that one with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and with a cauterie on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on the two ears, and two cauteries on two spines of the neck, and two cauteries on the back spines, and a large one near the ribs, and one on the back, and two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on the shoulders, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of his chest; and cauterize that one over all the joints of the said flesh and feet, and on each toe of his feet, and on the soles of his feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that are on top of the ankle, do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some wounds are cauterized with a cautery on the ribs of the stomach and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you should know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and more effective it is; and you should know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, just like they do with other instruments, so that their body is not startled.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And you should know that the cautery sizes should be large or small according to the members and joints according to what is preceded by the specifications of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the cautery with flour mixed with honey and the other medication until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of cauterization of stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb member with a cautery according to the size of the member or its length.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And insert the pointed cautery into the hole of the spine a little bit.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that wound which has been entered to be healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes the veins are cauterized in certain places that cause pain in the hands and feet, and in the spine and the eyesight of the nerves which move that member, and it remains like that.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	No presume over that which is not known in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves which move the whole body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the cauterization of warts that are malignant.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When warts are old and do not respond to any of the medicines, then you cauterize with a pointed cautery on that little bit according to the quantity of the white spot inside which remains white and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that powder of errors and of lentils with rose oil and of arnagrosa leaves, and of cinnamon or of yronda, each one a part and all are mixed, and then place a cloth and over the area where it is placed until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the cauterization of the skull.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and one wants to remove that bone, then cauterize it with a circular cautery as it is rotated.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the back cautery in the middle place; but I have not seen that, as I fear it may cause an ulcer, and I have already seen that in some cases.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is better to cauterize it with a circular cautery as we have said, or with a moth cautery.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 10.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cauterization of the abdomen.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some abdomen is delayed in maturation, and it is due to excess or the state of the patient, who is old and weak, or by time, and you want to accelerate the maturation of the abdomen; then cauterize it with a small pointed moth cautery in its circle; and place a bandage on that which accelerates its maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to make a puncture with this cautery, then place it in the following way: pause it at the middle point where it enters the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is placed in that location where it has been left, so that the chest of the arm is relieved; and then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the cauterization of a corroding cautery.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A corroding cautery is a corrupting agent that moves within the body, which corrodes whatever it touches as if with fire, like dry wood being consumed by flames.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see that corroding cautery in the location where it has suffered a fire cautery, then place a few small and large clavils as appropriate in that location where it is corroding.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize all parts of it until you have removed all the corrosion and there is no cause for it to return.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let it rest for three days, and place on the cauterized locations a mixture of oil inside until all the scabs have been completely removed and all the corruption has been eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then carefully remove those meat pieces that are generating pus.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh grows healthy where there is no corruption, good; otherwise, then repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And apply some sharp medicine to the wound, which is halfway between the cautery and medication.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, do not use a cautery on burns with pus, as it will worsen the condition.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you have already given the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, and now take that which will remain after the wound heals.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cautery for calluses and similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	These are calluses that occur in the parts of the foot behind the patient, which is a large cause of foot pain; and cautery is applied in these two ways, either with fire or with a pointed cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	However, cautery with fire is that the pointed cautery is shaped like a pen knife, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that contains the callus of the entire part, and of thin blades.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that burning object on the joint, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it remain for three days before it begins to tremble.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply that poultice made from wild marjoram leaves mixed with salt, and let it remain on that for a day until the pain is eliminated.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that wound with generated meat juice until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it does not convert, and there are many accidents on the surface of the body, especially in the thighs and feet, then you should administer in those cautery with hot water, and take a cup of iron or steel or pen of the volt, and place that on the joint; and then gradually add a small amount of hot water to the cup, and turn your hand, and rotate it around the joint, and press the margin of the cup on the surface of the joint, and find the hot water in the center of the joint; and wait for the patient for a short while until the mouthful of water is absorbed by the joint, and then remove that, because the joint will be healed.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And they did so, bringing both into the other as soon as they arrived on all of them in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then care for those wounds where the roots of the teeth have been removed from those dents in which the flesh is engorged.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter LIV.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of the cauterization of trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When someone has trembling due to cold in the nerves, or fever from a cause that causes it, or from another similar cause, then it is customary to cauterize with four cauteries or with one cautery on the spines of the back, between each spine put a cautery; and put a cautery in their chest, and over their stomach, put an olive.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of that person ceases and the healing of the sick person is accelerated.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of the cauterization of accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are wounds caused by accidents, and pustules that have been made from thick, corrupted matter; then at the beginning, as it appears, that it should be cauterized over all of the fistula with a thin cautery of myrtle wood, the end of which is extended to the fire; or with the long root of a long-legged plant; or with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes, according to this method, the points are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion; and if they do not believe it, and the excessive means used by those, and heal from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is better to do this before the evacuation with flebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 66.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of the cauterization of fluxes of sick people by incision of the arcera.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Too many wounds that cause fluxes of arcera are incised because of the plague, or from the incision of apostemas or cauterization of the member, and similar, and it is difficult to remain in that one.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when something happens to anyone, you must place your hand on the orifice of the arcera, and place your hand over that which you say is newly opened wounds before it is closed the flux of the sick person, and that it does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place in the fire the cauterizations of a few and many olives, by name, and blow on those before they are extinguished.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then quickly take a small or large second instrument and place it on the place where the artery is broken, over the vein, pressing hard so that the blood does not flow out, and then insert the cautery into that wound and keep it closed and restricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the wound is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove the instrument and extend the cautery, then take another cauterizer constantly used by those in the fire, and do not stop doing that until the wound is closed.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that another evil comes upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to close the wound in those places, and especially when the artery is large, there are four ways: either use a cauterizer as mentioned above, or extract it when it is not extracted, because when the extremities of the veins are burned and the wound is closed, it should be tied with a strong thread or bandage, or placed on medicines that have the virtue of closing the wound; and they should be strengthened by a cushion or compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May the one who administers a proper restriction of his clothing and a proper bandage or by positioning causes and similar ones, does not compare but burns.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If that happens to anyone and is not the doctor present or medicine, then open a small incision on the indicated part of that vein as we have said, and understand that the skin should not be removed from the affected part of the wound, and over the rib cage it should not remain; and above the ribcage, sprinkle with cold water until the skin is congealed and swollen; and cover in case of cauterization or medical necessity.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incisions and punctures and bleeding and phlebotomy and wounds and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that all illnesses in which cauterization with fire is appropriate and medicine burns, and the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and the forms of the cautery; and we have ordered the chapters of the sub-headings of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter to treat this matter in such a way that it may be helpful to those who seek such knowledge, regarding what has been asked.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And since I have begun that, child, you should know that in this chapter we will discuss what is described in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And since it is important for you to know that in the operation described in this chapter, which involves the removal of matter, the same precautions apply as in the aspiration of the vein or incision over the abscess or extraction of the stone or incision of the stone.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the worst cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that you should not perform this operation on yourself, for some of these procedures require the skills of a doctor to treat certain diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of them may be driven to their disease and die from it, and they suffer greatly because of the severity of their disease, and the length of their illness, and the fear of death that accompanies it.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those who give you such advice, you should expect healing and their illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not trust in anyone who comes to you with such a method; and your caution should be greater than what is customary, and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause about this unless you have certain knowledge that it works for you, and to which successful succession brings praise.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your illnesses prediction and indication of him to whom you are converted for salvation, because in that one is with you assistance on acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O children, God bless you with His understanding and does not lead you astray and protect you, because that is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters following the second chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head between the feet, so that it is for you rejoicing in that which you ask about and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the cure of gout, which is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You should know that this disease affects children during childhood and when the newborn opens his head, he is susceptible to it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	Sometimes it occurs due to an unknown cause.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have never seen this disease in adults; and to all those who I have seen with it, death has followed, and for that reason, I believe it is a work of the devil in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	I have seen a child whose head was full of water, and his head was always like that until he could not put his hand on it due to the greatness of his head, and more than the humidity increased until he died by fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is added between the skin and the bone, or it is added under the bone over the joint.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	If the humidity is between the skin and the bone and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision in the middle of the child's head at the top, and the length of the incision should be two nights until the humidity flows out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the humidity is increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity goes to the bone, it is similar to that you see the junctions of the head exposed from all parts and the water is squeezed out when you press it to the mouth and not to your hand.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	So that you cut in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And remove all the humidity from the incision; and apply compresses with cloths and feathers; and apply ointment of honey and oil every five days, and remove the scab and cure the wound with tests and ointments, and cover the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little humidity until that member is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of water, that sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and then pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the collection of water, and do it as best possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and engage it in flow, as this could lead to death of the patient due to loss of fluid and removal of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries that are close to the ears, called temporal arteries.
Capitol segon.	Chapter 2.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When a catarrh or swelling occurs in the thighs or chest, and it is confirmed that this is the case, and you do not confuse it with other treatments, then this treatment would be in the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to incise those that the patient's head has, and you approach the location with dry cloth to prevent the arteries from appearing, and you strengthen the collar of the patient with some cloth; and you consider where the vein is; and the locations of each above the locations that are close to the ears, and they are hidden in only a few people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then approach the arch of the foot with a probe, and then insert each one into the space of each part, entering it through the bone, and that is because of the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the probe through the artery and then cut it at the points above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if the length of the incision is two such adjustments, then when a vein is incised, the blood flows out, which is often frequent.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the arch does not appear at the surface, then measure the amount of space from three such adjustments, and then approach the probe, and enter it through the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that amount of blood that flows out is about one ounce, and it does not flow out more or less, and all of this depends on the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the replacement of the arch of the foot.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the cause, and if there is some reason for the abscess on the bone, then insert it through that so that it does not become an abscess carefully.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply strength to the wound with feathers and cloth from linen, and then care for that with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of stones that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an ancient or sharp stone, due to humid and bad conditions in the temples, or a very hard and similar stone, and it is treated with medical methods and does not respond, then we have shown extraction of stones from the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises the eyelids; and understand the stone that is apparent in the temple where it is shown by its own pole, and it is hidden only in a few people due to force of scratching.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then the back of the patient's hand should be strengthened with some cloth; and then scratch the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the stone appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And here is the shape of this spoon:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then, with the help of a hook that facilitates its entry into the acetabulum; and then, extract it from the bone and remove the pieces above it until you remove the hook from the bone and discover the pieces of the tendons that were left there, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with a thread at the end of the needle, and then cut one piece according to the amount by which its ends were elongated and contracted, and do not cut too much, because if it is not cut, the blood will not stop flowing.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then remove the blood from the wound with a cloth or gauze.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the acetabulum is large, then cover it with two pieces of double-strength gauze or cord that is long enough to prevent putrefaction and promote the consolidation of the wound and stop the flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the excess that is between two layers; and do this at that time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish, cauterize that part with the pointed cautery until it reaches the area where the edges of it are located, and it will remain in place like that of a wound dressing.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better to do this if the patient has fever or a scalded complexion; because the cautery is one of those causes that help to end moisture, and therefore it is better in such cases.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover the extraction of the arches that have collapsed in the old wound, and place them on clean cotton properly made, and then apply dry medicines to heal the flesh and warm compresses until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And while you are performing another procedure to stop the flow of pus from the arch, at that time you should press or cauterize that pus, or place something over the wound, and strengthen your hand until it is pressed.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes are present, then place your hand over the wound until the pus is congealed, and apply cold water to the area with great coldness until the pain subsides, and then strengthen it as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And the thing that is more painful in extraction of archery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, so that you have sensed both locations with tent, and pause as needed, mot ignitz, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that that which is between the extremities of it, because they are not solidified from all this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two points is as follows.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if the sharpness of two points is better than one, because if they are as sharp as two points approaching each other, and do not incise the flesh at speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, in those cases where there is some thickness, the heat of the fire should be kept in those and the flesh should be incised more painfully.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and less painful.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two points is the thickness of the aforementioned.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment of bodies affected by sharp and acidic humors from the wounds.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acidic humors are in the body, and they are in the veins on the top of the head, and there is no cause for healing in that area of medicine, and the face of the patient becomes wrinkled and feels like it is walking with ants, and the wounds from those are extended, humidified as if their fur is known, and their feathers are scalded by the acidity of the tears, the ancient methods in the cure of those of this operation, and name that cure a spasm.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to raise the hairs on his forehead, and then insert three incisions equally spaced along the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two times: the first incision should be equally spaced along the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second along the length of a little bit less than the movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And watch out for the beginning of the arches, which are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of the jaws to the mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each beginning is three times as much, adjust it.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge or dry cloths at hand, use them to remove the wetness from the wound.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula between two sharp edges, of which this is the shape of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Scrape away all the membrane that is between two incisions above the pericardium, which is over the bone, and then do so from the incision that moves towards the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then spread this spatula and insert another instrument into the first incision, which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place your hand on the sharp side of that scalpel against the flesh attached to the membrane, and on the other side of the bone, and push it into that until it reaches the second incision, and cut away all those vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	While continuing the incision at this point of the codex, and then make that in the median fissure between the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when an equal quantity of blood has been drawn, express the veins of the feet by constriction.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place your hand on each fissure of the old man's calf, and place your hand on those wounds that are open and bleeding and open, and make sure they do not become a pus-filled abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and then cure that with an ointment made from basil icon or rose-scented oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the cure of gout by cauterization and the descents of the humors from the parts mentioned in the chapter.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When a vein is cauterized and continues, and the veins of the patient become weak and their eyelids are ulcerated and they lose their hair, and in the beginning of the chapter there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you should know that the materials and cauterization do not come from any but certain veins of the parts mentioned in the chapter.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for those is this: command the patient to turn their face, and then make a small incision on the right side of the forehead, near the temple (and start the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; and it should go through the bone; and extend your hand under the temples which are bruised due to mastication), until it reaches the bone.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry out all the pus with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill it between the two lips of the incision at the old wound or with the cloths of the patient.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply a poultice on top of the swollen parts to prevent abscess formation.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the abscess has decreased, then rub the bone until it reaches the new flesh, and apply a dry dressing that makes new flesh, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of collofania and mix them, and make it into a poultice and administer it on these wounds to promote new flesh growth.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment of that which is found in the armpits.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All the cause that is found in the armpits is one of four species, either it is mineral stone or a similar cause to stone, such as iron and verdigris, or it is a plant cause such as celandine or fava, or it is a fluid cause such as water and vinegar and similar substances, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when stone is found in the armpit or other similar cause to those causes that do not adjust or believe in the armpit, and pauses the armpit in the sunlight, and if you see the stone, then distills some cause of purple oil or saffron into that, and administer the extraction of it, and make the sneezing condition, and open the nostrils for the event of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the armpit, and extend the armpit to the parts above, because those movements are forgotten in these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not possible to extract it with your fingers, then administer extraction using the instrument called the epicucious subtle, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is not possible to extract it with the epicucious, then administer extraction using the sharp instrument of double use.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then make a thin needle of copper and insert the end of the needle into the ear trumpet and seal around the needle with wax and softened oil so that it is not pushed out but the needle.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract it with a strong attraction, as many troops have reported that we have found.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not possible to extract it in this way, then take some unripe or ripe fruit and place it on the edge of a spoon, and wrap that covered edge with a clean cloth.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the ear trumpet and facilitate it, and remove the ear trumpet from the moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if all the causes that we have mentioned are not forgotten, then you should proceed to cut that part which was affected by abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of cutting that part is to first bandage the patient with the vein sephasica and then remove the bandage according to the method of the virtue of the patient, and then place that cushion between your hands and convert the golden thread to the parts above, and make a small incision in the edge of the golden thread where the grey matter of the patient is located.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the incision be of lunar shape until it reaches the bone, and when the bone is found, if you can use appropriate instruments, then make that incision at that time with speed, and cure that part before it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause is one of the grasses that we believe and is inflated, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your command, then take a thin spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to that person the antidote of that poison which has fallen into their ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do that when you think that the person is already moistened by the vapor from their ear, and pause them in a comfortable position, and prop them up with pillows or subtle gestures, or with anything that has been mentioned so far, which is praised for its extraction.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	May the water that enters the ear canal be used as a sneeze conditioner at the beginning, and fill the patient's ear with old wool, and place it on the ear in which the water is, and if it is removed, it is good; otherwise, take many thin needles according to the length of the above, and heat them in the fire for a short time, and the patient should insert one of those needles into the tragus of their ear and strike the other needle on the needle inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So do not stop that with the needle until all the water is removed.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And if the wound is open and you have a paper or cloth, put one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until it is burned to the maximum.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put another cord and do that many times until all the wound is opened, and remove that which is underneath as is said of the stone extraneous to the eye.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of beasts entering that ear, if it is a small one, use the same method and the same tool as we have said in the division; but if it is of great size, which causes pain to the side of the brain, then administer the extraction of it with great care and precision, and the cause of it is the most difficult of all the other causes that can occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of worms that generate in the ear, when you cure that which we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not compare your treatment, then cover that you regulate the ear to the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if some cause of worms appears here, then extract that small or sharp instrument, but if no cause appears, then take a narrow and wide needle of this form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the thin end of the needle into the ear, according to the amount that the patient can bear; and then strongly pull out that which was inserted, and do this repeatedly until all the worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if they do not obey your instructions, then you will open and close the circuit of the needle with beeswax as we have said; and then administer distillations that have been used in the past for treating worms, and look for this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your emission is the one that you use to fund the oils in the ear with this instrument of which this is the form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or copper, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and place it on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it should be done as they are in the cavity of the catheter here where it is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the rag and wrap it around the end of the catheter decently, and then pour some oil or herbs, or whatever you want from these medicines into the catheter -- and that is in the earthenware --, and then insert the rag above and press it with your hand until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the catheter and the patient feels the oil dripping.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is in the earthenware should already be heated with a small fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the liquid you will distill in the earthenware is not too cold, because the medicines of earthenware cannot bear that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the cure of the breaking of earthenware.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some people have had some broken earthenware from their bellies of those who were not perforated, and that has happened in some men, breaking of the earthenware in the middle of the earthenware by plague or by nothing at all in that; and this breaking sometimes happens in the front of the earthenware which does not know the excrement, and sometimes it happens in the parts in front.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And in the case where an injury occurs at the front of the body, and it is not understood, it is often difficult to treat.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the case where the cause is understood, cover the patient's head with a cloth and observe that area.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an outgrowth appearing, use this thin probe in the shape of an 'L':
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it where the width is small has one sharp part and the other not, and the probe is two spans long so as not to scratch the head.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the outgrowth is made of flesh in the head or on the body, then use this thin and sharp instrument to cut it away quickly before it becomes fully formed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the outgrowth is on the front of the head, then use a thin and sharp needle to heat it slightly, and then place it on the flesh of the head.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if the patient feels the outgrowth and finds it difficult to remove, due to its size, forcefully press it away with difficulty; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the head.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place a cloth of the second quantity of the wide tape that you have wrapped around the thigh; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any bandage and push it into boiling water and powder it over the wound according to the third, and use it; and if you see that the cloth has become infected, then remove it and replace it with another one that you have wrapped in a cerot that is made of oiled rosin, until the infection has passed; and then cure it within the time it takes for it to heal.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If there is an outflow of pus, then immerse a cloth or towel in boiling water and place it over the wound, and use another remedy that restricts the flow of pus, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of ectropion, which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	When some humors occur at the pores of the bones, some are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should hold those who are holding them or the cushion, and cut those who are on their ribs, and place your hand over the areas according to the trisectors.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is pain from cold venous blood, then you should cauterize those who are on the surface with a fine cauterizer.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cauterization is to incise and remove the dry humors when they return from the ribs; and when they are cauterized by fire, those ribs are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Cure for great pain that comes to the pores of the bones.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Humors occur in the pores of the bones due to some cause that resembles great pain in its strength and hardness, and is called great pain.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And there is an accumulation of thick humidity in the pore above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation in them is to consider whether the greatness arises from that which appears under the eyelid and is moistened at all parts; and the cause of it is unknown.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then place an incision over that part under the eyelid and remove all parts easily that may cause it to escape, and suspend that one and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you are not equipped with an incision under the eyelid and cannot penetrate the eyelid with a small incision, then it will not be noted in any case.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then adjust it with stitches; and cure that part until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then it will not be harmful for that part where the oil of it restores that and encases it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the greatness declines to the parts within the eyelid, then remove the eyelid and suspend the greatness with an incision, or another that you indicate of incision, and press all parts, and if the eyelid is elongated by the incision, then it will not be noted in any case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash the wound with salted water; and treat the area with what is inside that will heal it.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment of the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is gray matter that is produced in the tunics of the eyelid above, and especially in children, aggravates wounds of those and causes their catarrh the most; and they cannot look at the clarity of the sun because tears gather on those.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you see those people always talking with their mouths open; and on their mouths open while sleeping; and those have their eyelids under their eyebrows, which are already covered with inflammation, and imminent appearance of infection is in the eye; and when you press the area with the fingers, you push infection into those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some method of operation is in that which the patient pauses their head on the chin, and place a cloth under them and on top of them make a circle, and according to the amount that contains all parts of the body, and place that over that and press with the fingers of both hands all around so that infection is added in the middle of the circle, and then put a sponge in the middle of that humidity and insert it into the opening for the latitude, and the opening should not be larger than the opening that is made in flap surgery.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	May you cut the cord completely until you reach the umbilicus, where in most cases, the umbilicus is severed according to the form of a white grain.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then remove those bandages that you have wrapped between the patient's thighs and fold them between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to place the sponge in the wound so that it does not reach the bone and the other side of that.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If you do not see it at the beginning of the wound, then place a small sponge in the wound until the bleeding stops; and then remove those that we have mentioned; and moisten cloths with warm water and apply them over the area and strengthen those sponges.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And remember that they sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the wound to prevent that which is left from that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an abscess occurs in that location, then treat it with a poultice made of certain herbs until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of the methods of touching the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of wounds are not adjusted by their natural hairs and are antiquated, then touch those parts to the wound and make methods of maladies as with frequent tears and softening of the eyelids and cloth until that is the cause of destruction of the wound which is called tactinir of the wound, and cure it in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization; or by atactini at the beginning and suture; or by cannulas as I have said.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so cover the head of the patient with a cloth; then convert the eyelid of the wound to your left hand, and if it is converted, it is good; and if not, insert the needle in the part that is farthest from the eyelid behind, and make the needle penetrate above, and that — close to the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs — close to the hairs, and pull the thread above to the eyelid, and convert it to the right.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Approach the part of the eyelid behind the eyelashes and insert a small blade into the lacrimal canal; then remove the pus and place it under the eyelid or on a piece of cloth, and hold the eyelid open with your thumb while applying pressure.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, one should pay attention to the shape according to the degree of elevation of the eyelid, which varies among men, and those who require a larger incision in the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And approach the blade above the two lines that have been held, and begin from the larger lacrimal canal to the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural eyelashes, it should be as large as possible.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And place the onion in one of the two angles of the eye socket, and remove all the cornea, and adjust the incision with two pieces of thin wool or gauze, and wipe away the pus, and let any excess drip onto two cotton balls.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And after three or four days, approach the stitches of the wounds and care for that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, leave the stitches in place and care for that with a dry and constricting agent, because the eyelid should be sealed with the wound and its adhesion; but stitches are better. Therefore, I will now show you the ancient methods of taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But in his care for the patient, it is a good operation, and not in fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in taxanir, and it is that you place a figure on the eyelid like a mirror, and then lift the eyelid three fingers apart and bring it together according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to do that, hold the fingers apart, and if it is not equal, take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other end of the thread into the larger lacrimal canal, and the second end of the thread into the smaller lacrimal canal, and adjust the threads to be equal, and then raise your hand to the height that we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is unwell.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If a boil occurs on your skin or in your wound, cover that boil with wax and the same ointment, and apply it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Some wounds under the eyelid that are converted into eyebrows, then cover with what you used for the wound we mentioned earlier; but stitching is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To bandage the legs is as follows:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you should fold the eyelid and cut the figure that is according to what I have mentioned; and then, by art, make two bands or thin strips of them, of which the length should be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of theirs should be less than the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at the ends of each part where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add each thread under that which superfluously hangs from the eyelid of the eye, and press the bands of each part very tightly, and leave it for several days until the skin around the band dies and becomes rejected and rots within a few days if it is not removed.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is too late, then break the humor with lancets, and then cure the pain until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not prick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make cans that you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of raising the pricking hairs in the eyelid when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are unnatural hairs, hard, rough, and pricking the eyelids, then perform the operation in this way: you take a thin needle and place it on a soft and sharp cedar, and then adjust the ends of it and notches as subtly as possible.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the needles is the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you can make another thin needle from it in a short time, and use the ends of that if you want.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and position yourself close to the sunlight so that your work can be clearly seen, as this is a delicate and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then introduce the needle into the eyelid at the point that needs to be sewn, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelash, removing any excess above the eyelid.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the eyelid up and insert that into the eyelash, and have one or two or three but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand out and insert it into the eyelash, in the place where the eyelid is not sewn, to the eyelash naturally.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is not sewn, then insert it into the parts behind the eyelid that you have composed at that point, where it will stay sewn under the eyebrow.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then place it against the eye, as you will sew it and the eyelid, and grind it and clean the eye, and leave the bandage for two or three days, until the eyelid adheres to its place and heals well.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin is too short, then adjust a longer piece of skin from the natural skins, and elevate it to that one, or let it lie flat until it has stretched out enough space, and then elevate it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	About the cure of ehratism that occurs in the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it occurs in the outer part of the eye, and the contraction of the eyelid occurs when it is turned upwards, to the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the skin or dryness or cauterization, and this ehratism is called leporine, and whether it is natural or accidental, it is caused by poor consolidation of the skin or dryness or cauterization, or by similar conditions.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the method of the operation in this be that you cut through that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it in that which is between those a cloth of linen, and tie them together when they have healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not use remedies that dry out the causes of which they dehydrate and constrict, because if you do so, it will return to being worse than at any other time without fire having been used.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in those of causes that soften, such as fenugreek, and apply the water in which they are boiled along with their seeds or yarrow oil, which should be liquefied by heating all the oils, and apply this mixture to the affected area, and cure it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your remedy is that you perforate all the affected area that is not consolidated according to its original form at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation, which we have mentioned, is only a correction of the consolidation that does not return the form of the area according to how it was originally.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of consolidation that is made in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This consolidation that is made in the eyelid, which is not properly called consolidation; and it is of two kinds, one natural and another accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidents are caused by pressure or by cuts or by burns or by similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of operation for this is that you take a needle with which to make double thread, and place it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal into the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh to the parts above the needle and hold it with the other hand, and cut away from the needle, and insert it into the wide gap.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the figure of the eyelid returns to its original shape, it is good; otherwise, take the razor and place it on the broken part, and convert that part of the eyelid, and make the two cuts on the side of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And make the ends of the two cuts at two angles of the incision, which you made when they converge, and make the other end of each cut at an angle so that when they meet, a figure is formed.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is written in Greek letters: alpha.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh from that part as much as it is thick after the pain, which is called the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and bind them with wool thread; and then care for those with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you have made an incision or suture or cauterization, then you should make the incision flat on the skin of the eyelid according to what is prescribed.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the poultice between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the sermon on the cure of incisions when they are raised or lowered, that it should run in the operation according to what is prepared in the form of incisions, and that is in the form of various shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled craftsman always prepares an instrument in each possible way that is possible to enter and make the figure return to its natural form, or close to that, and the patient according to what suits the operation and tools in the best arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in men who have their eyelid stuck under the eyebrow and prohibited from its natural movement and works, you must insert the extraction of the ray below the eyelid, and raise it to that place, or extend it to the eye.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you insert the adhesion into a thin space, which should not be sharp to avoid discomfort for the patient and leave the space that does not descend to the eyelid and its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be made with ease until the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put salt water in the eyelid, which you wash; or distill it on it with a solution of zinc in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the corner of the eye, and place over the eye a piece of lint soaked in oil of roses, and then use the third day's remedy of consolidating agents until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	About the beginning of an eyelash and the thickness of flesh of the lacrimal glands.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You should know that an eyelash is of two types, either nervous, which is similar to a fine hair; or non-nervous, which is similar to white flakes, the type that when it touches the eye, often takes on the form of a wart and is then removed.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And these special types do not begin until the main lacrimal gland, which gradually covers the vision and prevents light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	When the worker begins at the beginning of the eye, he should place his hand on the patient's head and raise the eyelids with his other hand, and then lift the eyelid with his thumb, and then collect the eyelash from the wart with a pair of tweezers and extend it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert it into the horn of a cow or of a buffalo or of a wild boar, or of similar animals, or of strong iron, or by doubling the tip of the needle little by little and inserting it at the base of the nail, and pressing firmly on the nail; and extend it to the parts above, and scrape off the skin from the side of the nail that is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And continue to insert the needle into the back of the patient.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you insert the thin wire or small forceps into the lacrimal duct and remove the flesh of the lacrimal duct so that it does not become continuously flowing tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes cut the nail with the sole or firmly extended, as we have said, and then scrape off the skin from the side of the nail that is the shape of this:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the corneal tunic with the wire and that it does not break in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Approach the injured part of the body with a small amount of salt or a piece of cloth spread out, and let it remain there for several days; then care for that part to ensure it heals properly.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not broken and you cannot insert the needle or it does not stick in that place, then use this type of needle to cure the injury with medicines, and it will heal as it should be and as recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to cut that part, then begin by opening the thigh of the patient and taking a thin, sharp knife of fine sharpness according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with fine sharpness.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is thinned and confined and placed in that place, then sprinkle your own urine in the area made of cloth spread out or with rose oil or salted salt, and cover the area for several days.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until everything that is inside has been removed, but if the opposite pus is not in the area, then leave that part and cure the pus when it begins to heal.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And repeat your operation until it is healed within that reasonable time.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The inflammation of the lacrimal gland, if noticed in its location for great harm, should be suspended by an onion; and incise that part, and do not stop the incision because you do not want to stop the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then drip in the lacrimal canal and let it heal within that reasonable time.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	About the incision of an abscess and about that which is born from flesh adjusted in the location.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some flesh is born in the location of an abscess, and it is over-pressed before it covers the pupil, or approach or strengthen on the eyelids and strongly compress the eyelids to the parts deformed and it is assembled to the rose of a balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation is that the patient places his head on the chair; and then open the eyelids of that one and collect all that flesh with an onion convenient to that, and that with a forcep or a cestus; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished by the cutter, and guard yourself from the location that you do not descend that which you should do your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be made at the same place where you inserted that or the flat blade which we have recommended in the beginning of the chapter, or with small forceps which are collected as soon as the shape of the wound approaches this chapter's end.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then, when your incision is completed and the entire wound has been cleaned, fill the wound with salt-soaked cloth, or pour in the powdered herb and similar to the corrosive medicines, and place a damp cloth over the wound until it is certain that an abscess has formed.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause for concern and the wound is not healing well, and you fear an abscess has formed, then drain the wound and treat that abscess with what cures that abscess, and repeat this operation until it is healed, and similarly treat the flesh that has occurred in the wound of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But if your patient has any other treatment for the wound by natural or accidental means, do not use iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you have made sure that that member can bear that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of collecting blood from the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Blood flows from veins that are tumor-like on the wound and prevent the surgeon from performing their operation, and they remove the wound over a period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the wound from which blood flows is strong and not another disease than bleeding, then you collect that blood.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And if you command the patient to hold their head up, and suspend those veins with an elastic band or two according to your judgment; and that band should be of soft doubled material in this way:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two bands gradually in a coil in this way:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then those veins are collected with soft, thin forces, and thinness, and wipe them away hour by hour until they are again visible from the wound and turned back.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to damage the wound at its extremities; and if your operation on the morning gives light to the sun, and you are a firm in your operation that you do not incise those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed the task, then pour warm water or rose oil into the wound to help reduce the inflammation that remains from the saber.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	However, if it is not possible for you to collect all of it at that time, then apply the entire amount of it that relieves the pain from it, and leave it on for several days until the pain is reduced and it is ensured that an abscess does not form.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the process over it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the shape of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reducing hernias to their place.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat hernias with a pointed cautery or sharp medicine after the story of it has not healed, then do not insert into it but cut through the abscess to allow it to mature and remove all the moisture that is in it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then use this tool of which this is the shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And if it is known that the head is hard, and made of iron, and the cap is round as it is made to be pierced by a needle or an awl for a delicate puncture (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the location of the bone corruption, and gradually rotate it between your fingers until you know that that corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, and then restore the location with drying and styptic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the location is consolidated and it is in good flesh and the body is free from the sickness and remains for forty days without being renewed or becoming an abscess or having any accident, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then you should reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and you should take a thin iron or sharp medical instrument, and when you have exposed the bone, then you should take a tribo in this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The external edge of the iron triangle is rounded, and its tip should be extended into the extremity as often as possible.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place that one on the bone, and the other near the lacrimal; and lift your hand a little from the wound, and then turn your hand over to rub the iron through the bone, and the patient will feel pain as if it is being torn apart by the force of the iron when you remove your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, then apply a hemostatic and drying ointment to the wound as you have been taught.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Since the flesh and the wound are healed, then the matter that was exuded from the parts of the body returns to its place, so that is less painful on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of the reduction of the elevation of the wound.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the wound is elevated to its totality and does not cause harm or decrease in the excrement, then loosen the bandage, and then follow it, and then place several leeches on the neck for good succession; and then apply a liniment made of acetate, aloe, and sulfur, and strengthen the plaster on the wound with powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method for cleaning the bones is to take cloths from lion's manes, and each cloth should be doubled in four places; and make those threads.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place one over the other according to the amount needed for the required purpose.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then apply strong pressure with a durable, tight cloth; and repeatedly clean the incisions with succession; and after removing the cloths, leave the wound straight during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If during the time the ligament becomes soft, then it should be kept straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And after removing the ligament, keep it as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound has already been reduced, then apply the ointment to the bones and the bandage and the cloths until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the beginning of the elevation of the pupil.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When the tear in the pupil is disrupted and it elevates and protrudes through the eyelids as if with a knife, and it takes on the shape of a man, and you want to incise it, then the operation is performed as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the edge of the uvea from below to above, and then insert another needle double the size of the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate; and then leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the double and lift up that part of the uvea around the needle, and apply strong pressure.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place it on the woolen cloth soaked in white wine and lime, which will cause the thread to harden.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for that part where the pain is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some bandages gathered from all the parts are placed in a circle around the wound, and then perforated with a thin needle that comes to the bottom of the wound, and drain the bloody serum, and lower the bandage and enter it soon.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of gout.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease that is called gout is not other than a kind of inflammation that is adjusted in the wound, like water descending, and it is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The best way to work on it is to make the patient lie down on the bed prepared and dressed, and then take the main vein in both arms and that one through which you see the inflammation coming to the parts behind, and then dry it and do not let it descend, and close the wound, and the disease will be seen as before.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not go down, you know that it is a sign of illness.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if it is not prepared, you know that the descent to sanity is like what we have said, then do so with the patient's hand between your hands and take a thin spatula and put it on the conjunctiva near the edge of the cornea in the eye (where the eye is), until the sickness is gone.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then when the sickness is gone, you should distill in the container with water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already made a fenugreek and honey mixture.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure of the water descending from the container.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the specifics of the water in the division and which is suitable for piercing according to the speech declared, then that second one for healing.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you should make the patient lie down between your hands on a soft pillow and hold the container firmly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your hand close to the eyelid of the left eye, if the water is in the left eye; or place your hand directly on the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And if the water is in the left eye, take a spoon with your right hand; or if the water is in the right eye, take a spoon with your left hand.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the tip of the spoon near the crown for the thickest part of the ray in the album of the eye on the outer side of the lower lacrimal duct, and then pour the water and turn your hand with that.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And penetrate into the eye and feel that the spoon has reached its end due to the water.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And cover that the length of the spoon is equal to the space between the pupil and the end of the black line, which is the crown of the eye; because you will see that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And place the spoon in the place where the water is, and then quickly pour it down another vessel; if the water first falls on the cloth that covers the patient's eye, then wipe it with a clean cloth and place it in his eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And if it is necessary to pause for a moment; therefore, if the water descends, then pause at that other vessel in front of you that does not need to be emptied.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is dried and does not descend, then extract the almond with ease, and rotate your hand in the water, and dissolve a small amount of clear gemstone salt in that water; and place the wound on that cloth, which has been soaked in rose oil, albumen of egg, and honey, and apply it to the wound.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	 May those who live in our time pause on that three-legged table with that album of egg.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your almond with the instrument of the wound because of its hardness — which is one of the men whose wound is hard to heal — then cover it with that spatula, which is called the alberid, and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce it at that junction, and do not remove your hand from the wound, and do not stop until you have made a small hole in the almond.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then enter through the second incision that we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And prepare the patient for surgery, who has been made to sleep deeply in a position where they lie on their back in complete darkness, and prohibit all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place your hand on their chest to keep their nature calm and not move their head to the right or left of the entire body.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the bandage be according to its position on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that from the complete darkness and expose the free view, and make the patient see some causes, and then return the bandage within the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not do that during the hour of healing or as soon as possible after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having said that, you should do it for the sake of water being able to flow more freely and forcefully through great and violent regurgitation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs, then remove the bandage within the seventh day and correct that with the ointment that causes the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you examine the patient's face and place your hand on their mouth to control their breathing, which exists in the deepest darkness.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Then slowly raise the patient's head and discuss their causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in some cases the disciple of vision is not excused from performing certain operations, and then you should be skilled in the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already reached some of those that are in the Artach, and some say that they make fire in the Arabian desert by perforating the ground where water is found.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen any such thing in our land that has done this, nor has water been found in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magic by which one can be above those who do not know those things:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or copper properly, and their external parts are like this subtle triangle, the sharp end being like that form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	About the cure of meat in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When meat is stuck in the nose, various adjustments of which some cause certain causes, such as a spider's legs or polyps; and this malady is called polypus, which is similar to that represented by the pea.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from there meat cancer arises, which is black in color; and from there it is meat lion that is not of black color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those meats that are not fraudulent or cancerous, cover what you do for the malady between your hands and place it in the sunlight, and blow through your nose, and pick out the tumor from those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract it from those parts that are deformed, and then cut through that which you have comprehended from those meats with a sharp, thin knife of the one part where you know that all the meat is already stopped; because if it is from any cause of which the abscission is possible, then you should remove it with one of the thin instruments to facilitate it from there.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the lord has a boil or an abscess that has occurred, then pause over that place; or it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize the area where the pus has been drained and all the cavities have been closed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then sponge off the nose with a damp cloth or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is opened and moisture enters into the palate, then you know that it has been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate after the wound has been closed, then you know that there is no flesh in the pus that has risen to the bones of the nose where it was not reached by the abscess.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, after closing the wound, if there is any swelling in the place where it was, then massage the mouth with the amount of oil or medicine that is necessary, and examine the patient and introduce an end of the cloth into the nose to help the breathing or for another cause that is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And once that is done, draw the patient's scent inward towards the nostrils, and place it on their pillow, as children at school do when they perform this action, and it is the likely cause for that person who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place both of the patient's extremities on their nose and mouth, and administer a meat broth made from meat that has been in the patient's body, and do this while you know that the meat is already in the patient's body.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the patient, and place their nose in a bowl of vinegar, and do this for three days or more until all that is left of the meat is rotten.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, place a gauze in their nose to keep it clean until they are healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	However, if you find that the treatment is not working, use this method instead.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is the form of the instrument to purge the nostrils with which they are distilled and medicines in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make something like silver or amber, which is similar to a small open lamp, with a small bowl, and the same as the meat.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed canula like this with a cane, and the canula of the instrument at the end is to purge and is flat, uncovered; to which has a handle in the back of it, and hold it when you remove the oil or that liquid you want from the sucs and of the suctible causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this capipurge is precious: recipe of powdered castor, white bay leaf, ginger, pepper of safra, long pepper, escafragia, and spice ana unc. mix it with the juice of wine and of caul, and make small pills, and dissolve one pill in warm water, and put it in the nostrils of the patient facing upwards.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About the nerves outside the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The nerves outside the nose are visible and magnificent in other days, but they are hidden when you look at it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for that reason, you should insert that at the beginning of the appearance of the disease, and extract everything.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place your hand or use a cautery or medicine that is burning in the area where it was.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if it is late when the insertion is made, consider whether it is pustular, hard, of black color and little sensation, then do not touch that iron which is an abscess crancos; because those who inserted this abscess ended up with great malice on that one whom they had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of lion color and not black, and when insertion is possible in all that, then evacuate the patient and insert that sense with fear, and cure the area with that which dries and presses into when it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of suture of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by wounds or similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	When there is a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, do not compare it to any other operation, but only in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then cover, when any cause of those is found, whether it is a fresh wound or not, and then you adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure that within which it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of disruption of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then cover that you excise each part of their codex within which it does not cause harm.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with stitches and strengthen those, and on top of those sprinkle healing dragon's blood and three grains of triple powder, and place a thin layer of diaphanicon plaster or any other consolidating plaster on top of the powder, leave that for two days or three, and then remove that and replace that plaster and cure that within which it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the solution of continuity or needles be added as we have recommended in the abdominal stitching, or add the solution of continuity with a thread as you have done and make it known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that come in the lower lips in the parts of the genitals.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Barbed wire-like objects are found in men's genitals due to the lower lips of their labia, which are hard abscesses similar to nails, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should turn the labia and each of those hard parts, and fill the abscess with a soft material until the wound is strengthened, and then wash it with vinegar and treat the area with a remedy that has hemostatic properties until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the beginning of flesh attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	When there are many vagabonds around the adjusted jaw, which the ancients called albus, then cover that area with an onion or hold it with a pair of forceps and insert it into its place, and let the saliva run out or swallow it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then place your hand over the wound or apply other stanching or styptic powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then insert it again secondarily and cauterize it, because the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the reason for teeth falling out.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When sharp, rough, and sometimes vagabond scales are adjusted on the surface of the teeth, in the parts where they are located, and some are black and are formed into yellow or greenish spots before that corruption occurs through which the gum becomes and the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then cover the patient between your hands and place the cap of your hand on their head, and remove the teeth in which those scales appear similar to sand before any cause occurs from them, and that makes the blackness and yellowness and other colors disappear when they are changed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If it is still not clear what you mean by that, then repeat the reasoning on those points on the other day and the second and the third until it becomes clear to you in what you are interested.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	You should know that the teeth have required various shapes of razors and different figures according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so that you know which razor is used to cut the part of the tooth and another razor used to scrape between the teeth in other forms, and these forms of razors should be prepared by you as follows:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	So that you cure the tooth of its pain at all times and in the entire extraction of it, so that there is no cause that delays the course of it when it is extracted, because it is a sublimated substance within which is the extraction of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May you also be certain when the patient is ready to have that tooth extracted, because the pain deceives the patient and makes him think it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is extracted, which we have already seen by the operation of the teeth.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then, since you must certify which tooth is causing the pain, and you know how to do it, first cover the circumference of the tooth with some space where there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth from the gum on all parts, and then remove that with those called forceps, or with subtle forceps starting small and gradually until that concave part.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Then, bring a large needle with strong thread for good conversation or to stop the leakage, and place the patient's head between your thighs where you can hold it so that it does not move, and then remove the tooth in a straight line in a way that does not give more pain to the patient or cause him greater pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And then, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and place it next to the tooth on all parts to facilitate and make the removal easier as it is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or worn, first cover that break and strengthen it with a thin wire so that it is not broken during your construction on that part.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should work carefully with exquisite scarification around the entire part of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not tear it apart, and return over the patient for the main cause of their pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And guard yourself from doing what ignorant barbers do in their practice and audacity regarding the eradication of them, which they do not administer as we have recommended; for those who are experienced in such matters bring great harm to people, and all their reasons are untrue, or some of those, or that they extract from that with false bones of the jaw as those who have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And the eradication of it is washed with vinegar or with salt water.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is an outflow of pus, as those who are experienced in such matters do, then cut off some quantity of zigam and sprinkle it on the wound, and if you do not find that zigam, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and holding them subtly is the method that is praised for the long extraction, with a short handle and thick, so that they do not bend when performing those tasks.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And if there are times when the thick handle is needed before they are not bent, then use short forceps.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And if there are times when straight forceps made of Indian iron are needed, then use them in the extractions. The tips of these have teeth that interlock and grip strongly, and some are shaped like the beak of a stork, which is called a ciconia, and they are very strong.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and extraction of the bones of the lower jaw that are impacted.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to remove a tooth that is impacted, first place your hand on the location where it is lodged for one day or two until that location becomes soft; and then use analgesics or hold the tips of the forceps, which are shaped like the beak of a stork called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The outer parts of their thighs were cut open with a knife or scissors.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if they do not obey your command to open their mouth or you hold them with these forceps, then carefully place your hand on their chest and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called the atali, which is a small hook with this shape.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if the short end of the hook is thick, make sure it is not too sharp so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If the mouth is opened, then good; if not, use these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular extramatrix with some roughness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more delicate end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you can use this instrument with two prongs, which has the following shape:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And other instruments that you will need for tooth extraction; because it is very important to make this instrument, which resembles an ice pick, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the triangular extremity that is twisted or shortened, which is some kind of deformity, and is not thin enough to be a triangle.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another wise thing is that the instruments for teeth are also similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The artists are skilled and subtle in the art, atroba because of this they mean that the operation and various diseases; for some diseases to which the ancients did not say or pause a proper instrument, because of their different forms of various species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is thinned or broken, then it should be carefully handled in its place where it is convenient for the instruments and the forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help you to handle this one:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is some deformity little by little, and it is stretched or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak until the bone of all is fully formed; then restore the place with appropriate medicines to that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small pustule on the bone, then prick it and its black core, and heal it within so that it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of prominent teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent and do not fit naturally in their place, especially when they grow towards women or the venerable elderly; therefore, you should consider: if one tooth is not close to another, and it cannot be extracted by a drill or cautery, then you should remove that tooth. However, if it is not connected to another tooth, then you should use this instrument, which has the following shape; it resembles a pig's snout, and should be made of Indian iron with an edge that is very sharp.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And if you have inserted this instrument into the tooth over several days due to its hardness and it is not connected to another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth has been exposed to the jawbone, then you should use this iron file from India with the following shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And if the iron is from India and the mold and the pointed tool are made of brass, which are sharpened like limes, and the teeth of the die are ground one by one in days of work for convenience, so that no other tooth is worn out and broken.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then draw lines along the edge of the bone, and scrape it with a sharp razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if part of the die is quenched and scraped with the tongue, then make sure that you polish it inside where the roughness of that fraction is removed and smoothed, so that the tongue does not stick to it and the word is not corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of worn-out teeth with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents happen to the teeth due to blows or falls, and the patient cannot bear it, and you have cured it with hemostatic medicines, and your treatment has not been successful, then use gold fillings instead of silver, because silver turns black and becomes porous over time, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And if the bone is so delicate and coarse according to how much can enter between the teeth; and the method is that you take the bone and double it between two healthy teeth, and approach that it increases between two moist teeth, or if one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the treatment until you reach the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with skill and knowledge so that it is not moist.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your thread be the one that strengthens the bone against the edges of the teeth so it does not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then remove the excess parts of the bone with forceps or tweezers, and add those to each place as needed, and convert them into the healthy tooth and the moist tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then leave that which is tight as it is.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loose or broken, strengthen that or those with another bone in such a way that it remains in place at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the shape of healthy teeth and the figure of straightness in two healthy teeth, as follows:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is made that one or two teeth return to their cavity in those places, and they are recultivated as we have recommended, and remain so.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Only a skilled and knowledgeable craftsman can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Some vegetables are suitable for some causes of cow bones, and they are made into teeth as follows: placed in the place where the tooth is missing, strengthened as we have said, and remain so for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	About the beginning of the ligament that is in the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that is behind the tongue, some vegetables or it is natural to which man is born, or an accidental and accidental one that has already been consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in it is that the mouth of the patient is opened, his own cap is present in his throat; and he raises his tongue, and approaching it, inserts that nerve according to the latitude until the tongue is separated from its position.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any difficulty or resistance in that area, and this is due to the consolidation of plague, then you should use force and cut it through the layer until it is torn and the resistance is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to make an incision in the flesh and that you cut here and there, and let the pus flow out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the wound with vinegar or wine or salt water; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from falling out, as this would cause another complication.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If the pus flows out, place your hand over the wound to stop it; but if the pus comes out, then cauterize the wound with a pointed cautery that is suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the other causes until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula from under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some tongue wounds occur near the tongue, resembling a small sore, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural operation; and if it is not filled soon, it becomes maggoty inside the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation involves opening the patient's mouth and examining the sore.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of a dark or black color, hard and without pain for the patient, then do not touch that part which is crooked.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is declined to a white color, in which there is moisture, then you put the onion in it, and insert that sharp instrument, and cut it from all parts; and if worms come out during your operation, then you place a cloth over the wound until it is restrained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have completed it, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and cure that one and the other with the same treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of abscesses from the armpits and those that are in the groin and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess occurs in the groin, they are glands that are similar to cotton, which are deformed and are called armpits, which when you heal them with what we said in the division and is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of black color, of little pain, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron for the sake of healing; before entering it, let it mature, and then either you will break it or it will be broken by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, red, and the root of it is thin, then that should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation in it is that you consider, giving your operation, if it has already receded from it with caution completely or if it has diminished in some way; and then make suction on the patient, and the head of it should be in your hand, and open the mouth of it, and the servant takes between his hands the most noble instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And if it is made of silver or of iron, and is thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then when you press the tongue and show it to the abscess, and catheterize over that lesion, then take a lancet and put that in the clyster, and pull that to the parts forward as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing you pull from some cause of the membranes, and then incise that with an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, but the outer parts of which are bent, so that the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, so sharp, which should be made of iron and thin.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	However, if this instrument is not at your disposal, then incise that with a needle of which this is the shape of it: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And then after you have incised one wound, incise the other according to this method of incision, and then guard the patient from water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is diarrhea, guard against drinking water of decoction of senna or of fig leaf and similar to those of the astringent causes that restrict the flow of urine, and cure within that which is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some wounds in the mouth or other abscesses or those two ear infections, and insert those second that I have said at the beginning of the twelve measures equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in her mouth, the abscess tended to a dark color, of little pain, which had already closed her mouth, and the woman breathed very straightly, and had already been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and had already reached death if more days passed.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already caused so much that it had half a finger inside through two holes.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore you should have made an incision in one of its openings, and pulled out that, and thrown away a large portion of it, and then you should have inserted the other end of the wound, and covered her mouth, and held her tongue, and then you should have inserted the opening in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you approach him with a large amount of linen, but do not remove any of his blood, only a small amount of sanctum.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the absolute remedy for that woman is to begin immediately to drink plenty of water, and then bring food, but do not cease to incise that abscess many times over a long period of time, and another abscess will form in place of that one, which incises until it is prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So you apply an ointment and cauterize the wound of that person, and then apply this additionally; and then you walk around and do not clean what God has done for that person.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	About the incision of a wound when it becomes an abscess.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh enters the wound and it becomes an abscess and is long, then it is not called perpendicular; and if it is in the part that is large and round, then it is called a bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	May it be that when the wound is healed with what we have said in the division, and you do not compare your cure, and if you see that the abscess has already been removed from the wound and is subtle, then you should incise that which is added round; and if it is at a certain length, and is bloody, of black color or of dark color, and is not at the center, then you should attempt the incision of the wound, where there is fear over the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you see the second assistant that I mentioned earlier who has long and white hair, then make the patient lie down and take their tongue with an instrument that shapes it and place the tongue on a new, clean surface, and pull that one down and insert it into one of two instruments that are called tweezers in the beginning of a chapter about needles.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And be careful not to insert it more than what is adjusted over the natural term of its addition, because if you insert it too much, you will damage their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And when the insertion is done, use what we recommended in the beginning of a chapter about needles, and cure that one until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient was frightened by the insertion, then use anesthesia in the cauterization of that one, and the assistant of the cautery should only be sharp water, and you should place the cap of the patient on their teeth, and take their tongue with the instrument we mentioned, and take some of the water we mentioned in the chapter about cauterization, and comfort them with that living cause, and do not press it too hard or too delicately, and fill the concavity of the instrument which is in this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The external part of the cavity where the medicine is placed with the cavity of a spoon, and place the instrument of the medicine on the wound, and the patient turns his head to the side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person does not drip onto the surrounding area of the wound and that it does not cause any harm to that person.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand with the medicine on the uvula for the space of about one hour until that thing is denigrated and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a piece of cloth and wrap that around the end of the spoon, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the spoon into the cloth in a small canula until the cloth adheres to that canula, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and leave it there for three days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you need to repeat the medication, repeat that one, and after the cauterization, wash the area where the cotton was placed with cold water, change that area of the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and treat the burn with an embrocation, and give drinks internally until he is cured.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This type of treatment is safer than beginning with a longer period of fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some wounds are cured with the subtle liquid that is more gentle than cauterization, and it is cured in this way: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, scorched Arabic gum, camomile, and a similar amount of herbs as those of the plants, and adjust all those causes or some of them in a bowl, and let them be submerged in a very hot agriotage; and boil it, and let the bowl be well washed with decent water, and let there be a strainer over the bowl, on which a tool made of copper according to this method is placed.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	If the patient's hand is inserted into their mouth before the steam reaches the uvula over the palate, then the uvula becomes obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this procedure until it dries, and be careful not to perform this cure at the onset of abscesses, because it would exacerbate the abscess, and do not make this mistake, but rather declare the diagnosis of abscess from there.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	However, if this instrument is not available to you at present, then take a cane and fashion a clot of hooves from it, because the mouth of the patient will be soothed, as the hoof cloth prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of splinters and of that which sticks to the thigh and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Splinters stick to the thigh or foot or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then carefully remove what is visible from that place, above which the tongue is placed, using a spoon-like instrument, so that it can be declared what is in the mouth.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which is not visible and is hidden in the stomach, make the patient vomit, so that the food in the stomach can be expelled; or the patient may have swallowed a piece of bread or a small piece of meat; or take a sponge made of sea sponge, wet it with a strong liquid, and place it in the patient's mouth, where the throat is and the food is extracted.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And also take an eel and wet it with a strong liquid, and place it in the patient's mouth, and swallow it; or take a piece of bread and moisten it and place it on the tongue and swallow it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If those causes are not expelled, then use an instrument like this to remove them:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if it is a large one, make it smaller, and in its outer part, which you will insert into its mouth for ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And hold the patient's head elevated in suspension, and be careful of touching their jawbone, so as not to cause pain or damage to the bones or spine, or what the doctor might do with their hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, if the patient feels pain from that insertion, due to their knowledge of the location of the adjacent cause and pushing it downwards, and pulling their hand with the instrument in suspension, all this according to the amount prepared for it before it is removed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of blood clots attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood clots are treated with what we have said in the division of the cure and not with forceps, consider this in the throat of the patient at sunrise, so that you have understood the tongue of which you have recommended the instrument.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the blood vessel, extract it with a small or skillful instrument carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to remove that one, then take a concave canula and insert it into the wound of the patient, and place your hand over the concavity of the canula with an ignited iron, and do this as many times (until the blood vessel is dead and falls out of the wound) and keep the patient from drinking all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a full cup of water and wet the mouth of the patient with that, and clean the mouth with that; and do not let any cause stick to it, and make the patient drink an hour later another with their hand, when the blood vessel feels the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	However, if it is not forgotten that we have recommended, then scent the patient with camomile or assafetida with the instrument that we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, as in four days.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another method of operation in suffocation of that kind, you take an oven in which there are burning coals and the oven covered with a blanket in the middle of which is a hole, and it is placed in that hole the end of the instrument; and then give it above the suffocation; and place the patient's mouth at the end of the canula, and close their mouth so that the suffocation is not lost until you know that the suffocation has reached the bloodstream, which immediately causes death.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if not, then repeat the suffocation more slowly, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salted and other foods, and not drinking water, and if necessary this regimen should be abandoned.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument with which blood is drawn from the veins when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps sometimes, but it has some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The one who should be at the head, and its end resembles the beak of a heron, which is long, in which is asperated with lime, for when they find some cause, that does not leave it.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the speech on the recognition and cutting of abscesses and their removal.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are special masses, from various types of inflammations, according to the memory of them, of each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are different in puncturing and cutting them by various methods, of which one is for the type of abscesses themselves to enter; and because they understand about the moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the places where the accidents of the body occur, because the abscess in the head is another from the abscess in the anus; and the abscess in the fleshy part is another from the abscess at the joint; and each of them has a different surgical operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And more often, some abscesses that do not need to be pierced but rather allowed to mature in their own time and place.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses that should be lanced when they are ready, and not matured according to their own time and place, such as abscesses that are near joints, if an abscess approaches a joint, then it is prolonged inside until the pus inside it is drained, and often the tissues or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a main member, and if you delay its perforation, it will not be matured in time and will affect the main member; or it is near the anus, so lance it, but do not lance it before it is ready, as this could cause infection, only lance the one that is near the anus, so that it does not spread to the surrounding tissues and is elongated away from the parts of the anus, and it should be made into a fistula, or it should be made at the end of the abscess that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May you know the time of rupture of the abscess, and it is when it is matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is matured when the pain ceases and the cessation of fever, and the decrease in rigor and pulse, and the increase in the head of the abscess, and other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you know that the rupture occurs in the place where the abscess is placed, and from there comes the cure of the exudation.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The rupture should be made quickly through the long bones of the body or the body, if the abscesses are in the joints of the arms or legs, and in the places of the fingers, of the strings of the nerves, of the arches; and, at the back, in all equal places where no reflection occurs; because in those that are reflected, use puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in fleshy places, it is customarily said that you should not make the puncture until the digestion of that part is confirmed according to the complement, as we have said; because if you puncture that one before, the duration of the life of that person is prolonged and much pain is caused, and the lips of that part are hardened and the depth of that part.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	When pus-filled abscesses are perforated according to the size of the flesh or bone, depending on the need, or according to what the member indicates.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if you are administering small perforations, in large abscesses, make a wide and deep incision according to the difference in size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses where it is necessary that the tissue be incised and cut, when it is made, as if to make a hole, as in the case of those that occur in the armpits and groin.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that have incisions with three angles; and of those that are made as if in the shape of a leaf of myrtle, as in the case of the abscesses of the armpits.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those that are treated with round and crescent-shaped incisions, similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	When the one that does not have any such thing as superficial abscesses, you make a shallow incision only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, do not be afraid to pierce it, as you would not want to extract all the pus in one hour; taking out a part of it, and the next day put a poultice into the other side, and then take out a larger part, and do so gradually until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is very young, weak, or an infant, a child, or elderly and in decline, since the animal spirit becomes more aged and resolved at the exit of the pus, and often the patient dies, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be very careful with this chapter, and use your piercing in the way that removes the pus and consider whether the pustule of the abscess is few, or a flat section, then you administer any medicines from it or from another source; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the piercing are large, then make sure to press in each area until they meet evenly.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If part of the tendon is removed from the abscess or hollowed out in that area, you should cover it with old cloth or fine fabric made of linen, as when you have treated wounds or cuts, their moisture; and strengthen that by the third day; and then proceed to process and cure that with the same liquid that enters before it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If you accidentally have diarrhea during the operation, then you should administer cold water and vinegar in which a linen cloth has been soaked, and place that over the location of the diarrhea, covered with a blanket.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the diarrhea persists, then you should administer remedies and cures and powders that have been recommended in various places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the winter and the location of the abscess is in a place of many nerves, then you should cover those with vinegar and oil cauterized, and place them over those locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	When it is summer, and the wounds are fleshy, let it be known that you should apply powders made from ground herbs mixed with oil or vinegar and oil, and all of this should be done within the first three days, as we have said, and then let it be known that you should remove the abscess and clean that area and administer to it whatever is appropriate within the time it takes for it to heal.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction, as I have already mentioned, there are different ways of treating each type of abscess specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	About the sectioning of abscesses that occur in the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck of the head, small abscesses, and those of a special kind that contain membranes that are their own; and the species of these are called nodes.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And among them are those that are flat, and among those that contain moisture similar to cheese.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those which contain moisture similar to pus, and similar to them; and of those which are hard, like stones.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the dry section, and in the extraction of those which do not fear, as you should extract those which do not cause resistance.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the dry section of those which you extract with an instrument of the form that approaches it, which is called entromes, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If that which it contains is moisture, then divide that instrument according to its length by section through the surface in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section of the line of B to the line of G. Therefore, as the moisture is evacuated, then you excoriate that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, because troops returned, if they are from that cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian honey, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that place and leave it overnight, because that liquid corrodes all that which comes from that layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeat the Egyptian poultice second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no cause for that rash; then cure the ailment with the poultice until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you should incise it in this way:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a sharp cut, in the shape of a crochet, and then make an incision between two lips of the cut, and scrape off all the contents, and strive with your skill to extract the membrane that contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your surgical skills are not up to it, then do what I told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Similarly, apply the poultice of incision and healing as we have told you; incising over the poultice is easier, because it is less painful and less moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Some people have certain remedies for these abscesses that are in the head of those who never get wet; the cause is that when you incise over an abscess on the head of an old woman and atrobegui the abscess with a deaf, rough, white stone, which cannot be quenched, and if anyone is struck by it, that person will be plagued.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other parts of the body, accidental abscesses in the head are not covered in this chapter, as with abscesses that occur on the heads of children and require their removal, but the section of these all is a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And place your hand over the lower part of them to prevent the spread of the disease to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then use the appropriate remedy for that cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	About the section of scrofula that occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses often occur in the neck, armpits, and groin; and some occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and their causes among them, and all scrofula from these is within their own tunic, and as with neck nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the specific types of these scrofula are moles, some of which are stony, and some of which contain moisture, and some of which are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	If it is the type that you have seen in good condition in the Tactile test, whose color is propitious to the color of the coda, and is not attached to any part, and is not annexed to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the diaphragm, and is not protruding, so that you incise it from the dry surface of the part above the part behind the line of .G. within the line of .B., and score it on all parts, and extend two lips of the coda to the size of an inch, or of a small inch if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more important that the vein or nerves are not incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And the space should not be too sharp, which does not adjust your hand to incise, or which disturbs the patient, and which is not necessary to incise; because if you had incised a vein or diaphragm and prohibited it from your operation, then pause in the place of broken glass or other powders that keep the sane flowing, and clean the place, and leave that inside which has paused the sharpness of the abscess and the space is becoming soft and is beginning to drain.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the tumor is removed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	So return to your operation before you complete it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if there is any cause of other small scrofula under it, then incise those and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large vein, cover it as it is not to incise that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before covering, make sure that it is doubled strongly and that it does not fall out by itself.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then complete the wound with a piece of old cloth that you have already immersed in Egyptian mud, and care for that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that scrofula completely, cover it as you adjust the two lips of the wound and glue them soonest possible so that there is no excess.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess due to the size of the scrofula, then cover it as you incise its root and suture it and that which is called.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for the scrofula that contains humidity, make a superficial perforation here where it appears to you in the location of its maturation, and pause the perforation of that which is the lowest part of the neck, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the perforation, using instruments similar to those used in dentistry, in order to remove that which is corrupted.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleaned, then you cure that instrument of animal origin before it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the drying of the head of the abscess during its suppuration.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients used this drying in the abscess, and I have not seen anyone in our land who did that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of their speech.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men who have a deformity, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the abscess, because it cannot be done well without causing all the veins and major injuries to the patient.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or two boils, when the illness is not in the tooth, one should use the section of a leech to drain the pus that is formed due to inflammation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we want that, we should cut the leeches into three circles of the circles of the leech, or four small sections for the width in that which is between two circles by quantity, that the section is in cipher, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for section, which is free of flesh and the vessels of sand from it are hollow.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is afraid, then one should extend the tongue of the throat with an onion, and then tear the tongue until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of sand if there is any cause from those.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the lip second, as we have recommended; and it means on the section of the canal through the flaccid one which is of that and this is the cause of the disease that is from it and for the abscess of the foot.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then, when the time comes when that puncture is feared, add two strips of the skin of the wound, and let it alone to heal by itself.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh heal before it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the summary of the speech we have recommended is nothing but that one sees that those who have already opened abscesses in the body of the patient, and the patient has died, and his mouth has been closed, and they have incised the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the area of the wound for some time, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that reason, commander, leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and that malice lasts for three days; and therefore, commander, you should treat the wound in such a way that it heals within those three days.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen is that a servant holds a knife and inserts one part of the lung tissue into the patient's wound, and it was called the cure for that, and then he covered the wound with a bandage as if it were the wound of a dead person, and then exposed the wound and covered the healthy flesh that was around the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you should confess that there was no incision of the vein or guideline, and the wind was from the wound, and cure it within that which fire has healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not harm the servant if they do not refuse in the mouth, and then return to their previous dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now tell you that in the section of the epidural there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of incision over abscess which occurs in the groin forward, and it is called hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess named hernia of the groin is a large second in the color of the body, and it is caused by the women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is of two kinds, either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one, there is no cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is of two kinds, one of which is similar to large nodes, and the other kind is similar abscess which is caused by the compression of an artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not let him make incisions in him with a knife unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine that and look at that part, and if it resembles a gangrenous wound, and is not hanging from any of the veins, then you should incise that area with the gangrene and extract that which contains the black and purulent matter; and if it does not resemble a gangrenous wound, then you should examine the entire area and cure the wound with what you find before it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the separation of the kinds of gangrene.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the different kinds of gangrene that I have already mentioned in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you should be careful to distinguish between gangrene and a wound that causes doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So you say that a wound is characterized by heat and fever and severe pain until the boil of the excess is subdued; and it is a putrefaction that ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	When there is no fever, heat, or pain, and if that lion is at the foot of the bed, it is proper to place it there.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And if the second color of the body is like a swollen tumor, and its beginning is similar to a blister, whether larger or smaller, and it belongs to two species, one being oily and containing humidity, and the colors of humidity are mottled, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you reach the cure of the fever, remove that and inquire about that instrument called "intrame", according to its form, which is appropriate for this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is useful for the inquiry of abscesses and all swellings, and you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid place where you find the abscess, and you rotate its tip little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the cavity.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then place your hand according to the size of the abscess, and remove the instrument and consider what is found in its traces.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current moisture is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you scrape it off with a shallow cut as I have mentioned in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture in the imprints of the insertion, then you know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry over it with a cut of the shape of a crook according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have been taught, suspend that with an onion, and excoriate the entire cord of that part to facilitate, and keep the skin or bag over that and remove the pus from that place.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to remove that pus, and it may be necessary to leave that behind, and then you remove it later when there is no longer any cause from that place.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	But if it is removed with some cause, too much or not enough, then the pus returns as much as possible.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some small part of it remains, then complete the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place over that which sets the abscess cautiously, and cure that from another cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is necessary to remove a great deal of pus, then take both lips of the wound and cure that part which contains it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the pulse is opposite or not, then cover and fill the wound with charcoal powder that is vitrified and leave it for two days or three until the inflammation subsides and the boil returns to its normal state; and then return to incising that which remains.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for incision and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those that are the forms of probes, and of three kinds, which are large ones, which are long, and small ones.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large probe is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium-sized probe is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small probe is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, of silver, and of the ends that are curved decently, in order to avoid injury to the instrument when it is inserted into the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experiencers, and they are named Alberic, and one of them is called Berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three spices, one of which is great, and the other two are lesser.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great experiencer, its shape:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the greater experiencer, its shape:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the lesser experiencer, its shape:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is suitable for those abscesses, wounds, and boils, because among them are of the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And there are made needles, large lions, as with great golden needles, and they are made of copper, or of iron, or of silver, And the best are when they are made of copper.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made of black lead, which are like those that for them are opened the abscesses in the cavity of the ones that are reflected, that are reflected by their light on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of three types, first those that are long, and the others that are short, and the others that are narrow, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The great experience of the plumb line:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The lesser experience of the plumb line:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The smallest experience of the plumb line:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the nails are of three special types, first those that are simple, which have only a curvature, and there are three kinds: large, few, and short.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of them there are hooks, and there are three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those that have two curvatures, there are three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of them that have three curvatures, there are three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large simple nail, the shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a short simple nail:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a few simple nails, the shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large ounce of gold:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a medium-sized ounce of gold, its form is like this:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small ounce of gold, its form is like this:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large ounce of gold, it has two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium-sized ounce of gold, it has two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small ounce of gold, it has two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large ounce of gold, it has three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a medium-sized ounce of gold, it has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small ounce of gold, it has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the cautery knives that are sharp and cut the nodes and abscesses, and they come in three types, four of which are large, medium-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large cautery knife:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of a medium-sized cautery knife:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small cautery knife:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The edges of those that are made with sharp cuts and the other edges are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a way, but so that it can be done well in the excision of nodes to avoid the risk of incising a vein or nerve, and for those it heals the patient and at once brings tranquility by the application of the dressing that is used for the excision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the shapes of lumps, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of a large lump:
Forma de magda migier:	The shape of a medium-sized lump:
Forma de magda pauc:	The shape of a small lump:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	These are the shapes of warts and their similarity to mushrooms, which is made into alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the outer part that the pricked spot is hidden and in that place where the parts divide and are deformed, as you wish, as you can see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of pustules, which are hidden among the mentioned parts of the perforation of abscesses and do not pierce the skin, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the shapes of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of boils that are removed from the flow of pus, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; the shapes of which:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	These are the shapes of warts that are circular with some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should have great, sharp, and few knives, so that for those absences of blood flow from wounds, you can cut quickly in cases of necessity, and later when the first aid is not enough.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those knives to cut into all parts of the body, and only use them in fleshy areas, such as on the sides of the thighs, and the breasts, and the nipples, and the belly, and the groin, and similar to their fleshy wounds.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some wounds are made with those tools, which are similar to small fishhooks in this form; by means of which the blood is cut when it is done by phlebotomy, or you must start from a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some wounds are made round in this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the treatment of men's breasts that are similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some women inflate the breasts of certain men to compliment them for sleeping well, and then they deflate the breasts, and assemble the breasts of women, and roman apostemas, far away.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to the one who has that, cut those parts with a sharp knife in this form, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then excoriate the entire wound, and place the ointment of flesh on it, and adjust the two lips of the wound together, and cure that before it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast declines to the parts behind and is softened by its magnitude as in women, then cut it into two pieces higher up, and make two sections similar to the lunar figure, each of which contains the other's end, so that the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line of .B. and the line of .G. And then excoriate the coda which is between the two lips of the wound, remove the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary in the cure before it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the initial step of cutting into that which causes discomfort to the patient due to their anxiety and due to bleeding, then immerse the wound in corrosive liquid and leave it there until it eats away at the gray matter, and then cure that area which is now clean.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	About the puncturing of abscesses that come from the tonsils.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from the tonsils are of the species of scrofula, which contain a pus pocket.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And among those that contain moisture, some should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from line .G. to line .B. And as soon as all of that which is in the abscess of the sac is evacuated, then you should complete the wound and leave it until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And as soon as the wound has healed, it should be treated with an appropriate liquid until it is clean.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the pus from the glands of the neck and the scrofulous nodes is present, then you should lance it in the same way as we have described in the section on scrofula equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague is spread to an area that cannot be reached, then administer the cautery as we have described in that case.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section of abscesses that occur by wound or by vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the wound is broken and the cord is consolidated on top of it, abscesses and signs occur by which inflammation and abscess are known to be caused by artery or vein: because when the abscess is by wound, it is longer attached to the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a grating sound in that place.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And the one that is by vein is reduced to the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	The section of this abscess is an error, and especially in those that are located in the shoulders, and in the elbows, and in the neck, and in many other places of the body; and it is a great one, so you must avoid its cure by surgery, and that which is on the outside, or on the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	May you place above that which is theirs due to inflammation of the orifice of the archery, cut in the dry section in the long; and approach the section with tweezers and approach the archery, and remove the tunics within which it is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And approach that which is with an awl and make it penetrate into the other side, and clean the archery with a double-edged blade in two places, — the one which causes you to have seen in extraction of two archeries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And approach the place which is between two bands with a space within which it cannot be touched at all, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And approach the administration of cure in which pus is generated before the bands fall; and approach the one which is suitable for that within which it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is by section of the vein, then cover that you have with your hand at the location which is on your possible side of the abscess and approach the needle behind the location which you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread within which you extract from the other side, and tie the abscess with a silk thread according to what I have told you in the thread of grape of two parts at two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you are afraid of pulling out the thread, then insert the correct needle into the entire abscess at the beginning of the first needle, and strengthen the four threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in the middle of the patient's body before that which is inside it comes out, and insert the excess thread from the needle, leaving what is inside.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand over the powder that you have immersed in vinegar and oil, and then administer the cure that is made from cloves and garlic before it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, an abscess occurs in the artery and vein, and similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when it occurs due to their compression or excessive work, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made in the most convenient place of the helper or tailor, or in any place where the joints are painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And if it is a large abscess, and it resembles the color of the other body, and it is in the major parts of the patient's body, and when it is stretched with force, it feels like a great shock to the patient.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And if it is not an abscess attached to the front of the body, and for this reason it is left undone, and it is allowed to grow in all parts and does not go to the front or back parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, for those who are in the joints, it is not advisable to be pierced with iron, because it could cause great contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But for those who are in the head or forehead, the cautery is not done with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then do so with the forceps and cut that of the root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then hang it with an uncertainty, and scrape that, and remove that; and place the wound in a suture, and cure that before it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	When the abscess has occurred due to a wound that has occurred on the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	In some men, warts occur on their bellies and other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal because of their similarity to those that grow on the feet, whose reason is subtle and the head of which is large; and already their labia are conversed, and they are of those who are small, and they are of those who are very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in its belly were two parts that were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, of smaller reason.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already their labia were turned inside out and were inflamed, and moisture was running from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I inserted those and again in one foot eighteen unciae and the other sixteen unciae.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in their insertion is that if the patient is humid, and the color of the flesh is white, moist, of subtle reason; then you insert it with a flat spatula, and keep it in your presence, heating it in the fire, because warts from the section of which are expelled by that which is not sound; and if you find the unsound, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If the patient is suffering and afraid, hold a sharp knife; then take a freshly made spoon, strengthen that arm, the one we have mentioned; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust it in the narrow structure of the spoon; therefore, do not stop strengthening the large, rough part in the arm, until it is cut off and falls out by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	However, if the arm is of large size, then there is some cause for fear and terror, and especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	However, it is possible that you cut off the part of the arm, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then care for it until it is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to cut off the arm that is of dark color, thin touch, and regular appearance, for that is cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you will remember the memory of cancer in the future.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the treatment of a high fever at the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	High fever at the navel is caused by various causes; or by a fissure in the umbilicus, which is on the abdomen, and through which the cloth or intestine leaks according to what is said about the others; or by a scar that allows blood or arterial flow according to what is called it, or by constricted ventosity.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	However, if it is by fissure of the umbilicus and leakage of the cloth, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and the pain is lion-like, and appears in different positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is by the protrusion of the intestine, then the position of that which we have mentioned is more violent and different, and as you press it with your fingers, it disappears, and return; and it is very painful, and requires much effort to introduce it back and strong work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	However, if by moisture, then it is lion-like and does not disappear when you press your hand on it, nor is it constricted or crushed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is for pus, then first apply these signs to the wound as it begins to decline.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is for meat, then apply the pus roughly, thick and hard, and let it stay for a certain amount of time.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is for inflammation, then apply the touch of leprosy to it.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider whether the eminence of the navel is due to pus from abscess, or from vein, or from inflammation; therefore, be careful not to treat it, as there is fear and anxiety about it, as was taught in the chapter where he mentioned abscesses from abscess and from vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the eminence of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then command the patient to hold their own hand, and be standing extended; and then apply a tent around the entire umbilicus, and command it to be held between your two hands on its surface, and then wrap the space around the umbilicus over the place where you have well placed the tent; and then extend the membrane of the abscess to the parts above the ankle; and then apply a firm or loose bandage and the manner of the bandage decently.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Approach the abscess that has spread over the skin and insert the mentioned instrument into that spot and try to find the intestine; and if you have not done so previously or if it is not visible through the skin, then you will extract the pus and push the intestine towards the parts deep within the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the skin, then take that suture material and remove any excess of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is against your wound or vein, then circle that thread, and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them strongly into those two fields, and push two needles through the circle you made around the abscess in a cross pattern, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and let them enter the place where the flesh extends and falls off; or insert that which is subtle and can be removed, and then cure that which covers the wound with a solution that is inside it until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the prominence of the navel is made of flesh and no pus or moisture is found in it, then cover the wound as we have said and remove the sanc or the moisture that is in it, which often causes it to fester, and then apply a remedy that covers and heals the wound.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 43.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of the knee.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, of special knee and in what manner one should be treated with remedies, and that it is important to avoid ulceration; and we have said that the knee is often affected by the most and greatest care in its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancients said that some knee gout is in a location where it can be eradicated, such as the knee that is in the breasts or on the cushion and similar to the members allocated to stretch all of that, and especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and severe, do not cover it with yourself, as you cannot cure that one or I have not seen another, nor that it has reached that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation is performed as we have said, by preceding and leaving the patient, purging them of black bile for some time, and then stitching it up if there is an obvious manifestation of a wound.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation, and prohibit them from eating any food that could cause a reaction; and then examine every part of the body thoroughly without causing any harm.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And then let the blood flow, and do not stop it immediately, and express the affected areas, and wipe away the blood with your hand or with an instrument that is as clean as possible from your tools.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you find resistance from heavy bleeding at the beginning of a vein or artery, then cauterize it while the blood is still flowing, and then care for that area until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 4.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure of hydropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, of the various types of hydropsy and their symptoms, for the treatment of each type with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And in the case where only the specific type of altitudes is cured by iron, and not approximated to the specific type of timpanists or hypodermic needles, because that is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have already medicated this specific type of hypodermic needle with medicine and do not compare your medication, consider that if the patient has become weakened, or is another patient with another type of hypodermic needle, such as in the throat or abdominal area and similar to those, then be careful not to treat them with iron, because there is fear involved.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	However, if you see the patient with abundant virility, and it is not another disease but only hypodermic needle, and not in infants or elderly, then the method of operation for this is that you lift the patient between your hands, and administer the water to the exact part behind the penis, and then take a sponge according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	If the incision is long and sharp, with a sharp tip at one end; but it should be gradually shorter and narrower in some places, so that during the operation it does not pierce the intestine, and so that it does not cause harm to the patient.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider whether the generation of hydrocele is due to the intestines, as it is often believed that you should make the section along the belly for the length of three fingers below, on the right side of the patient's body.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydrocele is due to a problem with the intestines, then your incision should be on the left side of the belly for the length of three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of hydrocele is due to a problem with the left side, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not make your incision over the side on which you want to place the patient, so that the excess fluid does not flow to that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce the entire cord with the instrument, and insert it into that incision, and raise your hand between the cord and the abdomen, and remove it; and if the quantity is about one finger or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then carefully insert the pipe into the space until it reaches the desired location, which is near the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and is similar to a silver canula; it is made of silver or of fine iron, which has one small hole on its lower part and three holes on its sides: two on one side and one on the other; and its end is sharpened according to the manner of a pen, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And on its upper part is a ring, which when the instrument reaches the water, you should hold it over the instrument, and then evacuate the water in small quantities, because if you evacuate too much at once, it could cause great harm to the patient due to the resolution of their spirit animal, or accidents occur.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Evacuate the water according to the amount of virtue in it and according to what you understand about the patient's condition, virtue of the leg, and goodness of the patient.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and release the water that causes this, which is usually held back by a thread that you should cut to allow the wound to drain, as recommended.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then insert the instrument on the other side if the patient tolerates it, and remove a small amount of water, and do this for several days, being careful not to let too much water come out.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	However, if you are afraid of causing harm to the patient and let out a large amount of water, then cure that wound with dry sand and moist bread, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and cure that wound with desiccatives until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize the stomach, and the melon and the throat as soon as you have removed the water that precedes it.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 5.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the cure of children who were born with unpunctured urinary openings.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes, some of the children are born from the womb of their mother with the head of their sister not pierced (or struck straight or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then, cover the wound with a thin material according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then place a thin nail with a flat head and tie it, and let it be for three days or fourteen days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when you want to urinate, remove it; and then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not place the flat head, it is possible that the urine that passes over the area will not clean this wound.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But the one from which the wound is straight should be treated with a nail of flat head, as we have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which the wound is not in its place, it causes pain, because of those, that one who is born and the wound is not in the tip of the head so that he cannot urinate at the parts below, until the urethra raises the urethra to the parts above; and it is not at the generation, because so the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a malady caused by cold.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of the operation is that the patient should be lying on their back, and then extend the head of the forceps to the left hand, and insert the tip of the forceps into the space between the ribs, as if you were inserting a pen, or that you do not remove any part, so that the edge of the forceps resembles the edge of the forceps and that the tissue falls in the second space after the operation.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation of wound drainage, four things often go wrong with this; and pause at the place where you remove the pus, and cure the wound before it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 66.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the white spot that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the forceps and from corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the forceps.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Four things often go wrong with this white spot in the forceps and its elevation of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	No-malignant, a woman who hangs an uncertain and abscinds that entrance where those moons are whole; and place over that submerged part in Egyptian ointment; and apply that, cure the wound with that ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the wound is malignant, of a certain color, then apply a pointed cautery at the beginning and end of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the wound is in the prepuce of the head of the penis not circumcised, and one part of the wound is eaten into the prepuce and the other part is deformed, then apply the medicine that is eaten into the beginning until it is consolidated; and now cure that deformity, because when you cure that together with the prepuce, it is not guaranteed that it will not be trinquat.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if you have experienced accidents in the genitals and in the black and curled prepuce, then apply that which is already discolored and which is about to be corrupted or which has been corrupted; and place strips over it with honey, which is ground with flour of scorched millet and of three thistle and cress.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure that one on the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is excessive bleeding, then administer a lunar cautery in the following way:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	where the cauterizing instrument is placed at two positions simultaneously, one at the bleeding site and the other on the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the tip of the penis is corrupted and destroyed entirely in the hour, then introduce a blunt needle into the opening of the prepuce so that the patient urinates through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the prepuce to the tip of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in those cases where the prepuce is known, and over which circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to wound or abscess) then introduce a blunt knife through which the tissue is dissolved and the tip of the penis is released from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove those exactly, then introduce a blunt knife from the tip of the penis and the prepuce, and cut the prepuce, which when thin, is easily pierced by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then gently separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a blunt instrument, which is already hardened in water to prevent it from sticking to other parts.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then apply a styptic to stop the bleeding before it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	About the cleaning of children and the treatment of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution of continuity as in other plagues: rather, it is our operation and our will, and the latter is properly in children, it is necessary to assign in that better operation and via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of those free times, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experiment, which is the cause that I have atrobat the greater part of the artisans and barbers to use circumcision and cleaning with a knife and with a file; and they use a bandage and an introduction with a needle.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already performed all these methods and no better modification has been found with scissors, with a thread that is used in modifications like the nail, which motivates the escape of the coda more above, where the coda of the prepuce is between two tunics, and the tunic is more below, and it is often necessary to have another incision and a secure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the modification that is done for circumcision, and it is digital, of which tailors use, the incision of the end of the male member is not secure, where often it enters into the wound of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation, a nail, often it causes iron and damage your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The foreskin of the child is short by nature, and often it does not need modification in such a way that I have seen it.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But from the modification that is done with scissors and thread that is used in modifications like the nail, the good one, as I have experienced, is because the scissors are proportionally incision, for which the sharpness above is the same as the sharpness below; and therefore when you place your hand on two sharpnesses, and the incisions are made according to a comparison in a time; and it is compression of the thread that contains the foreskin of the penis in all parts, and it does not make an error of all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first step in the operation is that you make the child comfortable, especially if it is one of those who understands a little, and do not do anything but tie him firmly to his back, and let him rest until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then do everything possible to make him happy in that position.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make sure he is well positioned and not gagged; hide the forceps in your hand or behind his back, so that the child does not see those or any other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on his back and blow into the codeine, and pull out the one that is stuck at the end of the back, and modify that which is added to it from the side of the throat.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the place where the wound is, double the tape, and then tie a small second thread below that one, and then pull the end of the thread out and give it to the person who will hold the end of the thread well, and insert it between two threads.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then raise the chin slightly and loosen the jaw; and gently massage the neck, as it is better; and place powder on top of that and on the powder place a cloth in which is spread a poultice of barley flour mixed with honey and rose oil recently boiled; and let that be applied to the other side; and cure that with the cure until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for extraction, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	One of the extractions is not sharp and the other is sharp, so that it does not hurt the root of the tooth, and the length of the two cuts should be as long as the length of two handles equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in extraction is that too much force is used to push the intraoral tissue or a part of it away from the beginning.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, it is important to extend that of your hour to your finger to the postem of the area and to insert it with the same equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with forceps and insert it there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has been more than three days, and the pus is swollen beyond the wound, then let the pus drain out carefully, and scrape that area to facilitate healing, and insert the second one that you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the edge of the wound, so that it does not cut you there.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then heal that wound with the powder that we have mentioned in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it has not been cut to the right size, and you have not obeyed the instructions above, then do not use it there.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that wound with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter .lviii.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or a congealed mass, or a tumor, or flesh, and similar to those that we have mentioned in the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and you see retention of it being due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then make sure the patient is lying on their back.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the feet of that person on their own back and extend their belly from the lower part of their back, and the patient should tighten their abdomen as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, the neck of the bladder is pressed to expel the stone from the parts behind, so that the urine is discharged.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the urine is not dissolved and the cause is very painful, then make sure to administer extraction of it with an instrument called a catheter, which has this form: It should be made of silver and have a thin lion's mouth, similar to a long palm leaf, to which a thin cannula should be attached at the tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way to extract the urine from that person is by taking a thin, flexible thread and tying it around the opening of the catheter with wool or cotton for good grip; then insert the threads of the catheter into the part behind the catheter, and if there are any superfluous causes of the wool, do not introduce them into the catheter with force. Then suck the urine from the border and the album of the bladder.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And place the patient on a table, cover them with a cloth and rub their body with oil and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the catheter into the urethra until it reaches the opening of the vagina; and then bend the catheter towards the belly button; and then push the catheter through that; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and if the patient has not reached the cause of the problem, do not proceed with this order, but wait for the correct position.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly extend the small intestine with the thread, as the urine is soaked in the thread.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then remove that and do treatment for urine, use catheter, do not stop doing that and use catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient is again relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 99.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	About the quality of catheterization of the bladder with a cystoscope and similar instruments that are suitable for that.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When accidents occur in the bladder ulcer or abscess, or it is constricted by a stricture, and you want to drain fluids and medications from there, then use an instrument called a cystoscope, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but in its external part it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three parts: two from one side, as often.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning is a hollow, in which that is contained, and as often as it reaches that quantity, it is added, until when some cause is drawn from there, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled, the liquid is drawn out, and when it is expelled long, then as often as it does the cystoscope, which is made of pitch in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to draw fluids from the bladder, insert the end of the cystoscope into the liquid, and draw out that liquid which is contained in the parts above, because the liquid is drawn into the hollow of the cystoscope.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the crushed cloves of garlic into the incision secondly as we recommended in the circle; and then apply the moisture with that which you have applied, for that moisture perforates the bladder at first, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the delicate cyster is that in which the bladder is cysterized, and that is the shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or tin, of which the tip is similar to a small feather, and then insert the needle into the hole.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder and place it in the moisture that you want to cysterize in the bladder, and then tie it strongly with a double thread, and scald the moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the tip of the cyster into the incision.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand on the bladder with the moisture that has already entered into the structure before the patient feels it.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not see the bladder present, take a catheter and make it into a circle; perforate it throughout its entire length; and introduce it firmly in those places where it is turned; and then add the circle where it was also attached, so that you can pause in that place where you want to remove the moisture, and listen and watch.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then bring that instrument to the patient and do as you did with the catheter, and express the moisture from your hand until it reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of kidney stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already spoken of the species of kidney stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between those that form in the ureters and those that form in the bladder, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have spoken of the operation and section for the kidney stone.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The kidney stone that forms in the bladder itself is the one that sticks in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will tell you about that man's explicit and abbreviated exposure.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it is said that peyra, born in the bladder, often goes to the children; and from those signs of his, it is said that the urine which is excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that arena; and the patient feels pain in his lower back, and motas veguadas pen, and then it is dressed; and that is why those who have this disease often suffer from pain in their lower back.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the cure of those children who have that disease within them is when they reach fourteen years old; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In young people, it is often caused by that which is between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that from which the peyra is larger and the cure is less likely; And if it is small, it is opposite to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we reach the cure of that disease, cover the beginning of that which modifies the patient with crucifixion, which removes all the fissure which is in his intestines; because that fissure sometimes prevents the excretion of peyra due to its investigation.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then approach the patient with their feet and make them comfortable and quiet in order to prevent the stone from descending to the neck of the bladder, or jumping out of the area.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then prepare that cushion between your hands, and place the patient's things under them, in order to make the bladder entirely inclined towards the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then remove all of that filth.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then immediately place a towel over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you cannot remove everything from the area, then cover the patient's eye with oil on the left side, if the patient is a child, or the right side if they are an adult complete, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And then remove the stone while it is still there.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually insert it into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that against the patient's body, and expel it through the parts below when the towel is in place.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant to extend his right hand above, and his left hand to remain on the lower abdomen, which is below the thighs, in the part where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then enter a scalpel into the incision, and this is the shape of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And then cut into that part which is between the buttocks and the thighs, not in the middle, towards the left side of the cushion; and make the incision over the stone, which is in the buttock, and make a transverse incision, so that the incision opens wide and is narrowly closed according to the amount that the stone is in the buttock, and not too much, because if it is too much it will damage the stone, which is the cause of the incision.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you should know that there is an angle and edge on the stone, which makes the extraction of it difficult.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that place, there is a bone similar to a glass, round, and made of it, which is called a crown.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is to the one who has sharp angles and edges, adjust it in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if there is no such opening, then carefully chip away at that, or gently file it with a file that is suitable for filing stone, and do not remove it from there; or insert something thin and curved from behind.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do that, then slightly widen the opening, and if you want blood to flow out, cut away with a three-edged glass tool.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you push the tool into the mouth of the bladder, and carefully scrape it off; and then slightly push something else; and similarly do if they are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is necessary to chip away at that with a large section, which causes the patient one of two things: either death or because of continuous dripping of urine, for that place is not entirely solid.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	When administering an extraction of the intestine that is to be removed, or engineering in the fracture of it with the forceps inside that extracts that in feet.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then, when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in rose oil and water-soaked bread, to prevent the abscess from breaking out.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then, place the patient on their back on their own pillow, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that is removed, poultice the wound with water and oil, and then cure it with an equal amount of fenugreek and mustard seed until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If an abscess occurs in the wound, it is hard and inflamed, and if the pus is in the bladder congealed, and if that is the case, then enter a catheter into the wound and extract that pus, because it can cause the bladder to corrode and putrefy.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with warm water, vinegar, and salt, and apply it to all parts, using what is appropriate for the cure before it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover all the hours of the cure that you have placed on the cushions and adjust the medicines that are placed on the affected area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the bladder, and it is fixed in it, and there is no urine discharge, then cure that with what I recommend to reach the stage of dryness, because many troops are said to be dry for this cure; and I have already extracted it, and it is that you take a needle made of iron, of which this is the shape of it:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extraction, sharp, fixed in wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a fish, and place that bladder behind the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the bladder, perforating it until the needle reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And slowly rotate the perforator with your hand in that small stone, and you perforate the hole of it inside as you make the other one penetrate; for the urine is often released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then place your hand on that which is formed from the stone of the part of the bedpan where the urine is collected, for it is often urinated upon, and it is cleaned with the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	However, if this cure is not suitable for some reason that prevents you from doing so, then place one faithful person below the stone, and another faithful person above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then lie down on the stone in that bedpan between two cushions.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then remove the linen and clean the wound with boiled water, which is done in the place.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to place linen below the stone, but rather so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other linen above should not be removed, for when the faithful one removes the stone, the fistula returns to its place and gains the opening.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that reason, it is necessary for you to have the right tools, whether you lift the cord above the parts or return to your own place, and take the position we have mentioned.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61:
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are not commonly formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	However, if you see a stone in one of those, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many hands.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman is very tall and young.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who is very skilled and knows how to disclose whether the midwife is a man when she is casted, or if she has already had children.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not have a woman who is very skilled and knows this art, especially the operation of the most important part.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the incision over the stone in women is longer than the location of the stone, so you need to make an incision beforehand, and in that place there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If necessary, you should take a large sharp knife, which is easily found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are not in possession of such a knife, then find a sharp and thin one, or present a woman who is well-versed in the making of knives, or a woman who has recently parted with her husband in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then make such a request, and command her to do everything that you will tell her, from the beginning of the investigation until the end; this is because it is necessary to determine if the woman is a virgin, in which case you should place your finger in her anus and ask her about the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If such a woman is found, then cover her with your own clothes, and then command her to scratch it out of her anus.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If she is not a virgin, then command the woman to insert your finger into her vagina and inquire about the stone, while placing your left hand on her bladder, and take it out with good accuracy.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	If you find that, gradually increasing the pressure on that of the orifice of the bladder to the parts behind the summit of its virtue until it reaches that at the edge of the cavity.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then insert the needle through that opening of the neck from some part to where it is stopped and center the stone in that part, and the patient does not remain uncomfortable with the needle covered by it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the ray through that section, and if the stone is felt, then adjust the section according to the amount that you know how much the stone is broken from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the types of stones are small: some of them are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you should know what kind of stone is in that place where you mean by that which you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to remove the sand, adjust in that place vetriol three times and then through that for an hour until it is abscinded the sand, and then return to your operation until the stone is broken.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you prepare the tools that are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that they can assist you in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to expel feces, and know that the expulsion of feces is from the rectum which is indented, then place powder on the area and loosen those and the structure descending, and do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not remove it, because if you do, the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the sharpness of the stone has been lessened and the wound is healed, then return to your operation before the stone is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of incision on hernias.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia is not other than the accumulation of moisture in the white sinew which contains the contents of the groin, and it is called a hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some veins are in the proper pancreas which nature has prepared in the part of the groin, until it becomes another hernia; and this is the vein of the groin between the white sinew which we have said, and this is not other than fat.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakening of the muscles, which happens to the genitals, so this matter is infiltrated into them, and sometimes it happens due to a blow caused by physical activity on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has various colors, such as the color of it being declining to yellow or red, or black, or gray, or white and thin, and that is the one that is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the symptoms by which one knows that this aggregation of water is these: since it is in the white pus that we have said, then the abscess gradually becomes longer and similar to the shape of a bird, and appears on the genitals, because the humidity comes from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the own skin, then the abscess gradually becomes longer and similar to the shape of a bird, and it is estimated by some people that it is another bird.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the folds of the genitals and the white pus, then it causes pain.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	When you want to know the color of the humor in the abscess, first extract the color of the humor from the pus that is inside the abscess; and if there is any remaining in the bottom of the abscess, judge it as such.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when you come to treat him with iron, first order the patient to be bled if it is possible, and then examine his pulse.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then make him lie on his back with his head hanging over the edge of the bed, and place a cloth underneath him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then place yourself on the left side of him, and order the assistant to follow on his right, who should extend his arm at an angle of about one foot from the groin to the part of the stomach.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a wide spatula and cut open the groin from the wrong side towards the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Then make the incision straight and at an equal distance from the line that goes down the groin, until you reach the white bone that encircles the hip joint.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Expel that person, observe, and guard yourself from the possibility that you might injure him; and your excoriation should be done gently and subtly, as much as possible according to the quantity.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then approach with a wide-bore needle and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate between two labia of the section and extend the needle to the parts above; do not touch the cord that contains the testicles, and insert the needle in that way that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Insert it into him completely or in small parts, and more subtly than his lateral side, because if you do not subtly examine the insertion of it, it is not certain that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the cord processes from that deforation of his testicles during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the needle, return to him, and approach adjusting the two labia of the cord of the testicles with a stitch, and care for that as you would with other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If the corrupted heart is affected by another illness, then carefully remove the veins that are attached to it, and extract the heart, and then treat that part as we have mentioned before.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the water is added in two equal parts, then you know that two are hernias; therefore, insert that part in the same way as you did in the other one. If it seems to be an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you wipe the sweat, and insert into the sections wool submerged in oil or rose oil; and place another piece of wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and expand it over two gentles and the miracle of the belly; and place cloths and powders on top, and tie those with a bandage according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then place two cloths and fold them with woolen carmenata according to this form; and make the edges of those that are pressed from cotton or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the belt of the trousers, and one of the extremities is held in the buttocks between the two, and the second is held at the part of the underwear, and two extra extremities on top of two cushions and two other extra extremities on two angles, and all the structure should be adjusted in the belt of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a pointed cautery instead of natural section with a knife; and you should take a fine cutting cautery and insert it into the groove of the inguinal, and ignite it according to what we have recommended before that it be discovered when the white cyst contains water, and then you take a cautery of this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that cyst, and ignite it before all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the cyst with your fingers, and excoriate it with your fingers, and excoriate it with the fine cutting cautery; and insert it according to what is possible inside you that you remove everything; and be careful not to touch the fire.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting than the usual method of section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter resistance to the abscess at the time of section or ignition, or flow of pus, then cover that resistance which causes it to you, according to the treatment that is appropriate for it as soon as it is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is too weak, and does not want the second operation due to its horror, then administer anesthesia as I have recommended; and when you are certain that this hernia is incarcerated,
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then perform the operation on the patient who is lying on some raised cushions, and puncture the abscess in the lowest part of their abdomen, and cover the puncture according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the drainage be wide enough so that all the water drains out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the incision and hold it there, so that the water continues to drain out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for that wound until it is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If resistance is encountered in the outflow of water at that time, then puncture that: and this is not done except for the white cloth in the orifices of the wound which causes resistance and prevents the escape of water, then place a pen or instrument in the wound from which the water is drawn by hydrips, the shape of which is preceded; or adjust a small pressure on the edge of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and is applied near those months or environments; and when it is applied, then pierce according to that manual method, so that the patient can pass their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On incision over fleshy hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the incision over this hernia, there is great fear of perforating the major structures; therefore, I see the release of it and being saved from that better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation in that place and the species of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, say that the abscesses do not occur in those places where the intestines are placed and are made for various reasons: either due to excessive acute pain, which is found in the intestines, or due to impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the place, and it does not appear in the pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And if the abscess is very hard, of which the color is dark, and does not hurt to touch.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some veins are made by the compression of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those that already exist, or by the inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	This is known as the dispersion of the abscess when it comes in contact with the skin, and does not require that touch.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	This is not dispersed from the abscess by any cause due to the compression of the skin.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this kind of section and on the other flesh; and you insert the tendons of the genitals, and then stretch the skin over the parts below, and extract that from the white membrane, and remove the suspensory ligaments of the veins, and tie them, and insert the suspensory ligament as you remove all of the parts of the skin.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the skin is already attached to those flesh, then you should remove it and insert that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is an adhesion due to some cause of the intestines, or between those that are between the buttocks, then you should remove all of that adhesion and incise it at the beginning with a round knife.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the adhesion is flesh in the location where it is behind, then you should incise all of that which is from it, and extract the flesh as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose oil and vinegar; and apply a dressing to it until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the treatment of hernia that is in the thighs.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The thigh is an abscess involuted by some wrapping similar to a blister due to the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to perform any exercise or walking on the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear for that which preceded it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, we must first perform the operation on that second part which causes the first symptoms.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that you should lay the patient on a raised chair; and then place the suspensory ligaments of the testicles at their back parts; and then take the cord of the genitals, and extend it to its full extent.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert the sharp instrument through the cross section on the right side of the veins where the veins are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scrape off all parts that we have mentioned in the extraction of acorns, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place a double-headed needle in it, and insert that first into the places where we have mentioned that the wound occurred, and then insert the other end of it at the back.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert them in the middle place through a straight section according to the length of the wound, and extract that which has been added by the putrid and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the pain with the remedies for other pains in which you want to be born from the fact that the veins that do not cause any harm for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If it happens that all the veins are affected, then cover the testicles so that they are removed or that the testicles are damaged by those, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the beginning of the veins, and that they are stablished, or that they are damaged in such a way that they are not injured.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the belly from the angles of the umbilicus, so that the intestines of that rupture can come out from any of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the abdomen or of excision of it, and these two species can occur by different causes: by impact, or by squeezing, or by a loud noise, or by lifting something heavy, or by similar things.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	When the swelling of that part, due to prolonged extension of the tendon, occurs gradually over time and does not occur suddenly, it is a furuncle because the tendon compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	When the swelling of that part is due to the section of the tendon, which begins with sudden and intense pain; it is a boil that appears differently from the usual appearance, and it is caused by the intestine, and its cause is the injury to the parts of the tendon.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Sometimes the intestine is forced out through the opening in the abdomen, and this type of hernia is called an enterocele.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Sometimes the intestine is forced out due to flatulence, and sometimes it prolapses into the abdominal cavity, and it is held in place with a bandage, and this is very painful for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain and more so when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this illness, iron is used with fear, because it is believed that it should be avoided due to its sharpness.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The method of the operation for that is to command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with their hand at the parts inside their cavity if they obey your return, and then place it on their back between your hands, and raise their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then tie the cord that is the cord of the testicles to the parts above, and insert the cord of the testicles completely through; and then place two needles in the incision secondly as indicated to close the incision with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision according to the quantity that is possible from that has been sutured.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then excise that which has been left by the cord of the testicles, until it is discovered white and hard from each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you enter the finger that you said in that which is the testicle, in that which is between white and hard from each part, which is left by the cord of the wound, and between the incision secondly, and solve that adhesion which is in the part behind the wound.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then, using your left hand, lift the white cloth over the testicles to the right side, and elevate the handle of the white cloth to the left side; and command the assistant to extend it, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind after the solution is completed.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And then, using your right hand, check if there is any cause of the intestine wrapped in the white cloth that is not covered.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause, then place it on the patient's abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then, take a needle that is thick and made of iron, and insert it into the back of the white cloth, which is located at the base of the testicles, the section; and insert its two ends, which protrude about four fingers, and place some cotton on them in the shape of a cross; and tie that needle to the white cloth which we have said is behind the base of the testicles.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then gently wrap the legs and tie those with strong bandages until some of the veins that nourish them cannot pass through, so that no abscess occurs from here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then place another bandage along the second line, three fingers away from it; and then leave these two bandages on the scrotum, which is left behind the testicles, of the same size as the first one, and insert the rest of the roundness, and remove it from there.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then insert into the part behind the scrotum by section, through which blood and pus flow as we have recommended in that place where we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; and tie the bandage that we have recommended (and some white bandages of the second line are cauterized, which we have said to place at the beginning of the wound to prevent bleeding); and leave the bandage until it falls off.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the patient's urine is delayed, then apply warm water to the abdomen and place your hand on the area where it should fall second after we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the wound with the other remedy for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of inflamed hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, no one has been seen who has been cured by iron alone.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that is seen; which is that you should place the veins close to the section over that facility of him; and dry in the middle location around the pus that causes that, until the veins fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Then treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the dislocation that is made in the joints.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some people have broken their joints as we have said, and they have pointed out the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And there is no known cause for hernias in the groin; and if there is, it is rare; and it returns to all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	However, if the time is prolonged, it is adjusted by making a fissure in the groin before the hernia enters the groin; and this is done by extending the groin, which is as we have said, causing the groin to be stretched, and then becomes soft, and the area becomes inflamed and emerges.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with a cautery as we have previously described.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some wounds are cured by iron in this way: and it is that the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then the area of the inflamed abscess is cut open by section according to the amount of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the groin white that rises the cord inside before it is discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the ray and place it on the area of the groin that is emerging, and press it on the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then approach the two prominent locations on the outer part of the elbow, and adjust one of those sutures to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then remove the part of the elbow, and do not incise the elbow completely, nor extend the intestine, nor any other cause that you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the wounds, clean it and restore the wound before it is consolidated; because the elbow is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this location, as it is more conducive to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cords of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	The cords of the testicles are softened in some men by the fact that the tissues that are between them are softened, and the arrangement of it is maintained.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is undergoing treatment for this that he should lie on his side, and incise the entire cord which is softened over the natural cord; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If you wish, use three or four stitches or a suture to close the excess of the softened sinew at the beginning.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then insert into the stitches; and cure by healing of the other wounds within which it is healed and fall away the scabs.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	About castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause it is allowed to me to remember of it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember of it except for two reasons, one of which is that the doctor knows that it is when he is asked about it from someone who knows the cure of it when it happens; and the other reason is that we have had the necessity of castration of other animals for our benefits, such as horses, and cows, and pigs, and similar to beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore it is said that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition or by incision to section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the area where it is done for traction, the method of the operation is to make a cut in the animal's tail until the tendons and ligaments of the patient are softened and hanging.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take those and place them in your hand until they are resolved and do not appear again from the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In castration done for fissure and section, hold the animal and take the cord of the testicles from the other side.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then tie the suspensory ligaments, and make an incision on each side until two sides are processed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then make an incision on those that will be removed from each side.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave any cause on those of the cipher, but remove the thin cipher that is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is the best that is done for traction, because traction leaves no cause of the testicles so that the animal does not desire gout.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then take care of the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of hernias.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hernias in men occur in two ways: one is when it appears where the space between the testicles is, and another is between two testicles, where it is shaped like a woman's breast.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some of those who have it in the space between the testicles also have urine.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is a special case: and it is that the breast above the pubic bone is like two testicles of a man, almost all the way to the opening of the vagina, with the nipple of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: one of men's, and one special for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you should insert those fleshy parts adjusted inside until it escapes the beginning of that, and then take care of those wounds with the treatment of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second special case of men, where the urine is in the cavity of the testicles, there is no cure or operation in it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	About the lentil and meat that are prominent in women's causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Strong lentils are adjusted according to natural causes before it is ripe and is made as usual; some are magnified in certain women until it is spread as in men and perceived during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, you have the excess of lentils with your hand or with an ounce and incised.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not incise too much, mainly at the beginning of the vagina, so that it does not become a source of blood flow.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then cure it with the cure of the wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Meat that is not yet cooked is meat that was in the horrible place of the mother until it fills that one, and very much is attached to the parts deformed according to its shape (and for that reason they first call it "deformed tail"); therefore, you have to incise it like incising lentils, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is not broken, or is slightly narrow.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to an illness that has preceded, and that is caused by meat not properly cooked or by subtle or rough spices.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused by food or in the stomach of the greater, or in its costumes, or in the most superficial part of it, or in the most deepest part of it, and prevents from eating and engorgement and digestion, and very strongly prevents menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is caused by regularly eating meat, if the oppilation is obvious, then you should avoid it; but if it is not obvious, then you should circle that with the fingers or with the ray.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if oppilation is due to subtle spices, and it is directed towards the two lips, then you should cover and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And place your hand on both of his thighs, and then press the indicated points of the abdomen.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, with her legs extended, and then extend both thighs outward, applying force until the delicate joint is broken and the impaction is relieved.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take lint and pour oil on it and place it on that spot, and bandage the patient to prevent the wound from becoming consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the joint is large and thick, then cut it open with a knife or a mallet.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the impaction is caused by flesh, then suspend it with an ointment and cut it open.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And apply the medicines that stop bleeding from wounds with bites, such as honey, dragon's blood, and lead, adjusted to the size of the wound.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide-bore needle to prevent the wound from becoming consolidated again.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold that for several days and administer some of its juice.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then apply the other treatment of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes accidents happen in the main nativity of other flesh, and then you should cut according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if there is a pustule on the neck, to the pustule on the neck that is in the main part should not be made any way with iron.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the treatment of hernias, tail, and red swelling that happens in the groin of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hernias are caused by the opening of veins' mouths until those from which blood flows continuously; and with their counterparts, hernias are made.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of those and their symptoms, and to say which receive treatment and which do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, say that hernias and their counterparts when they are in the main part of the neck and do not appear to touch, then in those should not be made any treatment with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those that are in the upper part of the body, on which cats feel pain, those are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And cover the woman's mouth with a cloth and extend the forceps or the sharp blade, and insert those into the teeth.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then apply powder to those from one of the invasive powders for bites, such as garlic and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then soak her feet in cold water for an hour, and then place that in fresh water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding from the wound persists, then make that into a decoction of smartweed and sorrel and vinegar and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take wheat flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a poultice with that on the back of her.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the wound is abscessed, it is good; and if not, make it adhere to two bandages, and at the breasts are the incisions.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and apply it to the affected area with a poultice of coliandre or arnagloza or guarravier and vinegar, and make it adhere to the area; and then care for the area with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May I ask what that is which is of rough appearance, so that you may insert that which you have at your disposal from the second that I mentioned earlier.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the perforation of an injury to the major eye.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Special cases of accidental abscesses in the eye, such as granulomas and abscesses and ulcers and adherent and erpetromens and fistulas and rags and thyroids and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these diseases and the special cases of those and their symptoms, and their treatments in this section.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And if you want to know in this treatise about abscess surgery for the eye when it is one of the abscesses that collapses healthy tissue, and if you want to know how the operation is performed with a needle.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp and caused by percussion and flexion and fever, and sometimes it swells and if it catches on that feeling, then do not puncture it, and cure that with what helps to bring out the maturation until it stops the sharpness of the accidents.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then consider whether you should make the woman lie on a bed that has two mattresses; and lie on her back and adjust her feet to the part of the belly behind the abdomen, and her thighs are expanded, and place your hand on her breasts behind her arms, and hold them with what is convenient for that.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should follow behind the left and administer the instrument that is inserted into the major opening, the shape of which will be found in those causes that will be mentioned.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And consider when you want to administer this instrument that you are at the opening of the major vagina of the woman, and that what comes out of the instrument is not more than the opening of the major vagina and does not harm the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the tool is larger than the bone of the greater, then place powder on the surface of the bone of the greater to prevent the instrument from entering the bone of the greater.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And place the thread that is inside the needle above and have the assistant hold the instrument and rotate the thread until it is inserted into the greater opening.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the instrument is ready, touch it with your hand and oil it, then wipe it dry with a cloth.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the wound is evacuated, place a moistened cotton pad in the wound with some hemostatic agent; and place the bandage on the section in the bone of the greater.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And cover the greater and above the wound with a clean cloth soaked in water in which some vinegar has been built up.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And after two days, apply the ointment that is suitable for that wound until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some wounds are washed with the major and plague water mixed with honey, and then with water from a long-necked or astrological jar, and then return to the wound.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep and soaked in the mixed honey, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, as we mentioned in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to best treat infants born in an abnormal way.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The necessary cause is that the midwife knows the normal figure of the infant at the beginning, and when you see the woman expelling the parts, and desires to smell the air, and on that she is held by someone who is there, and quickly sees the position of the infant, then you know that this part is in the second natural position, and its position is on its own head, and the second arm is hanging or suspended from the belly.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, make sure that the patient's belly is gently compressed so that the fetus does not come out too much, and if it does, place the secondina on it, and this is a good way to manage those excessive movements.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Since this is another part that is not natural and not usable, when the fetus is outside the patient's feet and the patient's body is facing the patient's head and their feet, and the patient's hand is on their chest or at their foot, or the patient's head is outside the patient's belly, and it is greatly turned towards its own collarbone, and similar to the figures of the patient that are not usable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these causes, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And by showing all the figures of those, and what is happening in them so that it means that and is on that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When it is outside the patient's head naturally, and that is very strong on the woman and is done at that difficult part, and if the virtue of the patient has already been weakened, then do that, or what the women had for the patient, and evaporate the pain of the patient with fenugreek and olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the catheter between her legs and bend that one second, or cut it at the end where that moisture is.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Press the belly of the woman until she gives birth.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if she does not give birth, then cover the woman with a mixture of pillows and a mixture of fenugreek seeds.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, approach the cradle, that she be calm and make her sneeze by condition; and take her mouth and nose for an hour, because the baby will soon be born.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the mother's breasts are not full at the beginning, then gradually cover them with a small cloth.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a blanket and lift her feet off the ground, and gradually lower the blanket to the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the shaking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the hands are not intact and the patient dies, then incise those and remove the remaining flesh from the body or place a cloth on the wound and remove that as well, because that person is dead.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the issue of the embryo in its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the child is lying on its feet, then cover it with those things, and turn it over to make it small, and hold it like that, and take one of its legs and extend it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When they are issues inside the thighs, then command it to speak, and make that extort itself in conditions, because that person is dead if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not dead as we have recommended, then return the child little by little into that second natural position, because that person will be dead soon.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden to do all that we have recommended, then take some mustard and dissolved gum, and grind it all in the mortar for good percussion, and apply that to the wound of the woman, the lowest part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then perform that bath in warm water until you achieve the hypochondriac.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts below are softened, then apply a poultice of myrtle and rest it on that place.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the poultice has been heated for an hour, then place it on a hot stone, and remove that which is in the mouth of the patient, and lift him from that place, and press the lowest part of his belly with gentle compression, which often helps to relieve the pain.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	And observe the patient's pulse and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	And when the patient is observed in this way, gradually engage his smallest fingers; and place the woman's hand on his neck, and his feet downwards, and those should be placed on the light, and complete his hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And gradually press on his belly, and remove that which is below the feet of the patient before it is prepared in the lowest part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the fetus is not forgotten, then take the feet of the patient and move them vehemently, and gradually press that which is over the small of the back into the parts above until the fetus is pushed away.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert your hands and gently push the fetus little by little, and command the woman to express herself until the fetus is pushed away.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The entire length of the fetus hangs from one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It should be engineered in the reduction of the patient's intestine, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and let that go.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it cannot go, then make the enema on the left side, and shake the cushions of the patient violently, and gradually administer oils and medicines that you have.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the child is born, then make that which you have on the table, and study the reduction of the intestine, and push the fetus according to its natural figure, and cause the woman to understand when it is pushed away.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The body of the child, with its arms spread out, is lying on its side, with its foot facing downwards.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife held the child's hand and gradually turned it around, and that helped.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it becomes equal and the same, then pause over the back of the child with that which we have recommended for oil and muds.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command the child to turn its head slowly, and when you have done that, place a cushion under its neck and command it to lie on its back; and then command it to relax.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The outcome of the prepared child is on its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the second finger of the midwife is inserted in this way, consider, and then you insert the second finger into the vagina until it is emptied of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the child is suspended by its face and neck, then you insert your finger into the navel to prevent it from being held and dying.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then apply the bandage to the parts that have been divided, and place a second one on the area where the second one was placed, and make the woman understand some signs, and the man who is outside should be ready to assist if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The death of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that the signs of twins or many fetuses are different, and some are three or four, but this is strange and difficult to understand; but if it is a natural cause, and not a living one.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, whether they are multiplied, one after another, and they are separated by the cord in the navel of each of those, and some signs are not obtainable as if it were a fetus by natural means, and its existence is indicated by some signs that we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to understand from their signs and reach what we have said about the unnatural figures, then you should follow those that we have recommended.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the wise and skilled woman does that which brings ease and subtlety, and speed, and is intelligent according to all figures as it is prepared by the engineer leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarries.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women are formed in the first, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and it is already necessary to verify that a woman who miscarries does not give birth to vi, and another all formed, which cause is made for the glory of the saints.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all such knowledge that should be in the science of the midwife who is very useful for that which seems to be like that, and therefore pauses on that which she knows.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus, do what we have said in the division of medicine and do not deformed it, and you are able to use operation with your hand, then pause to consider whether the woman is of sound health and not subject to any of the accidents by which she is feared for perdition.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	It is customary for the woman to be laid on her left side, with her head inclined towards the right and her legs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The assistant should hold the patient's arms at two points or place them on the left side to prevent the patient's body from extending during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then, you should moisten the mouth of the mother with oil and a mixture of tea, fenugreek, and sesame seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then, the midwife should place her hand on those oils and mixtures, and then enter her hand into the mother to facilitate the birth of the fetus, and then place her hand on the location where the umbilical cord is attached to the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	In such cases: then you consider whether the fetus is ready to breathe on its own, and if so, you should look for the umbilical cord in the neck, head, mouth, palate, beard, sternum, ribs, or intercostal spaces.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the patient's condition is on their feet, then in the penthouse, or in the middle of their back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And that they hold the nail against the straight part of their hand, and place the curve of their hand in that location between the fingers of their other hand, and place your hand on it with ease and put the nail in any of those locations that we have mentioned, until you reach the cause of the pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and hold another nail in the position of their hand, or a third if necessary, so that it is attached equally, and not extended beyond its straightness, only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it should be made at all parts, so that the pain of their teeth is relieved as it is done in tooth extraction for them.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And that in that place where the extension is softened; and if any part of it is held, then cover those fingers with oil and insert those experiments and turn those that are held.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the joints are moved into a place that is less painful; and make sure that the entire fetus is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the arm is bent against the other and it is not possible to reduce it by the flexion of the arm, then cover that area with a cloth; and remove it until everything is forgotten, and insert it in the joint of the arm or in the hollow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And make sure to do the same in the other arm and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the fetus is large, or it has been dislocated in the neck, or it is at the back of the head not adjusted, then make sure to insert between these spines and cut the head and remove the water, or use an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will come from the shapes of other instruments in the capital that is appropriate for this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Similarly, do this if the fetus is naturally large: and then make sure to insert that into the forceps, or use an instrument called "alunda" as we have said; and remove the bones with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is exposed and restrained by the furcula, then cut through it so that the moisture that is in the chest may be drained.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it does not complicate matters and the patient is not overweight, then you should insert the head as soon as possible according to your ability.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the left side of the abdomen is swollen or in hydropsy, then you should pierce that through which the moisture that is in it flows.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the child is on its feet, then the direction of the umbilical cord should be towards the mother's mouth and the direction of the mouth towards the child's mouth.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the abdomen and chest are restrained, then you should remove that cloth which has covered your hand, and then cut through the abdomen and chest so that that moisture flows out of them.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are still attached and the head returns, then insert your right hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, then introduce your hand into the vagina, and surround the child's head, and push that against the mouth of the mother, and then insert one or two fingers, and pull out that.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed by an abscess that has occurred to her, do not force it open; before doing so, cover the area with warm moist compresses.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply ointments; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the wound is on their side, if possible, it should be pointed: and that which we have said about the living wound should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be incised and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And make sure that there is no cause of decomposition in the second day.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operations, administer that which we have said about the treatment of abscesses which have occurred to the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flow of sanctum, then draw out in stopping waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in the belly of whom was dead, and above that other fire began to burn, and above the dead fire another was made.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	A long time ago, the man had an abscess in his belly; and when fire was brought over, he began to tremble violently.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	He was called for treatment and treated for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then he placed some strong-adhesive plaster on him for several reasons, and after a few days, he removed another bone; and again, after a few more days, he removed another one; and he was very surprised because there were no bones in his belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then he thought that they were bones from a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then he continued to extract bones from him, and removed many bones, which were already in various positions in his belly, and had been there for a long time, causing him pain.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	He did not think it was strange, but rather that in that case there was knowledge and help from the doctor who made the artificial arm for treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the shapes of the tools needed to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vomiting that occurs when the greatest amount is eaten:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strength in which the free are equalized, to which equality causes two vomitings in both extremities of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this vomiting should be more subtle than restriction, and it should be done either with an iron or a thick rod.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the length of each rod should be two hands and a thumb, and the width of each rod should be one hand; and in the middle of both rods, there are two adjustments of that measure rod, which are already fixed, of which the length is the greatest of one hand and a little more, and the width of each is two hands, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the main person so that they can be opened when you turn those two prescribed vomitings.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form of that more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Make a device from wood or iron according to the resemblance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	May also at the end of each of its two additions have such times, and the length of those additions is like a palm, and the width of each is two digits.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the main one, then you place the cushion over the left leg while hanging the right foot, and then place that which is between its thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then raise your hand with the instrument according to the amount you want of the approximation of the mouth of the main one before the midwife makes it so that you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of truth that the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of force that is pushed to the one who is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of assistance that is held in the big head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps at the end of which there are teeth, such times, and some of these forceps are made long according to this form, such times, with teeth at the end of which is sharpened and held.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of anemia medication:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a needle that has a spike:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a needle that has two spikes:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps with which the jaw of the clamp grips the head of the fetus:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a scalpel that has two ends and by which the head is removed:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two long scalpels:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more they multiply the species of that and prepare the artisans, as it is lighter to their operation and also easier for the men by their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not work with those instruments whether it is here or there, because the need for those is not excuseable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction of the second tooth:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second tooth is held, you command the patient to hold their own tongue, and then do that storming condition, and strengthen your hand over the mouth of it and over its nose, and if by any means it is deformed and destroyed, good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take an olive oil and perforate the roof of the mouth with a sharp object and place it on those herbs that are burning in the mouth, such as camphor, rough and bitter herbs, and camomile, Arabic spices, cassia lignea, and sainturea.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the oil, and place it on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a cannula of cannavier in the mouth of the patient, and hold it inside so that the vapor comes to the concavity of the mouth.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then perform the described maneuver as we have said, and the second time it is performed quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this treatment is not effective and does not succeed, then command the midwife to place her left hand in olive oil or a mixture of aloe, and then enter it into the womb and rub it quickly, and as soon as it finds it, then take it and extend it little by little, if it is attached to the mouth of the uterus, then enter her second hand as we have recommended, and when it finds it, remove it slowly and correctly so that the woman does not suffer from the violent attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	When the patient lies on their back, it is convenient to place a pillow under their head for comfort.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of attraction, so that it obeys and avoids adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is covered, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and medication from the herb of the leaf.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	However, if all the causes we have recommended are not forgotten, then keep in mind that whatever is issued from the patient to the mouth of the mother should be placed on the cushion of the woman, and then crestrizate it with enguent and tetrafarmacon; because that will cause it to rot within a few days and dissolve and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	However, when it rots, the bad smell is raised to the head and stomach, and that causes harm to the patient; and therefore, it is necessary to administer sub-fumigations and appropriate remedies to that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May the ancient remedy of fumigation with myrtle and dried figs still be effective.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The shape of the instrument by which the woman is fumigated is used for the retention of menstruation and the secondinea.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of ivory or wood.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the narrow end should be placed in the mouth and the wide end over the fire, with the fumigation being done over the flames of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold it until that fumigation is consumed and repeat another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the healing of the child's unperforated anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When newborn children and their anuses are not perforated, which have already been thinly and firmly squeezed.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then ask the midwife to pierce that thinner part; otherwise, pierce that space sharply and make sure it does not touch the sphincter.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place a wool soaked in vinegar and oil over that pierced part; and then heal that wound when it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that he is unconscious, then pause in the trachea with a needle for a moment, and remove it when the child wants to cough.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if you have accidentally punctured the anus for the consolidation of a boil or abscess; then make sure that this consolidation is not broken, and then treat it with the same remedy as we have mentioned for healing and drainage.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that have occurred previously.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the lowest part of the buttocks, which are often large and occur near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	And if it is a fistula or an abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And if that opening is old and drains moisture with white or thin pus, and some worms penetrate some of these fistulas.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating worms are known by the fact that they come out through the opening and by their shape; and some use the patient's excrement for this, and it is often found among these worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas are sometimes stretched in the spaces penetrating into the bladder, and into the meat of the penis; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the navel of the belly.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in the case of those fistulas that penetrate into the anus and do not penetrate, you insert your finger into the anus, and then insert a thin iron or iron rod into the fistula when it is not tense.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if it is tense, then insert the thin iron or iron rod into that thin tent until you feel the tent or the hair on your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel the tent or the hair at all and there is no cause of excretion, vomiting, or diarrhea, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then treat it accordingly.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the penis, then the meaning of that is immediately clear from the urine, and it is prohibited to have that place treated with medicine until the location has been consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If the pain penetrates into the joint or bone and causes a sharp pain in the circumference, then it is considered a sprain if there is not a turgescence inside the bone, and a sharp pain in the circumference of the part; and that from there, it often spreads quickly; and that it does not hold in that medication, nor is it consolidated with an ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those punctures, it is not completely cured, and the cure of those is laborious and depends on the skill of the doctors over which it is stopped.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	If in that which is not penetrating and ancient, healing is expected according to what you recommend, and that which has already been done and proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his side, and raises the cushions of him into his, the cushions are inclined towards the belly of him, and then insert a probe, or an iron if there is turgescence in the puncture, until you know the location where the probe enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If you see that the patient is turning blue around the navel, then immediately insert your finger into the navel.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel the tent in your finger has already penetrated and another is felt between your finger and that siphon or flesh, then you can be certain that it is penetrating; and then do not treat in that area, as it is not a healing, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, it should be noted that this is healing in some people.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine for which one hopes for great improvement in that is that you ignite a thin cauterizer according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and introduce that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the navel; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all the adjacent flesh-covered fistulas that resemble a quill of a pen have been cauterized.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then care for that area with bandages wrapped around it until all those flesh-covered areas have been healed, and then care for that area with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh; if it is healed, it is good; and if not, then it will not be healed at any time by another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the probe enters, and does not penetrate into the tail, which is in the anus, and between that and the probe is a thick layer of flesh or fat, and if the fistula is in that place on the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and see if the probe dries, and if it is in the fistula, and when the drying reaches the place where the end of the probe is, and through the probe is released and cauterized.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Then clean those fistulas that are assembled like a pen of lead and have no cause from those.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if pus comes out between you and your operation when you have cleaned those flesh, then milk that is and of the pus use a sharper instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because the cauterizing with fire adjusts good doses: it adheres to those flesh adjusted, and abscizes the pus from the excess of humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then approach the wounds covered with bandages or cloths, and remove them carefully before the location where the arm begins to bleed, and then carefully remove the hard, putrid flesh that generates and solidifies.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these remedies have both astringency and dryness; when it is restored, it is healed and there is no risk of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is extended to the surface of the rectum, then insert the finger into the anus and examine that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if the tent is inserted and between you and it is velum of flesh or flesh, and is intended for penetration, then it is not an operation in that but a second way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause of this is to administer it in one of three ways: either to cauterize that as we have said; or to dry up that which you can reach the cavity for so that you can insert those and the cure proposed; and do not proceed with any sepsis because you do not insert the lacert containing the wound, and what has happened on the patient's willpower; and then cure that which we have said is very strong to heal; or to lengthen that velum and wound that pus which dries up that entrance proposed to the cul, as we have said, or with another sharp instrument, and then moisten those fistulated flesh which are in the section into the one where you can do the crustation; and then force yourself to restore the whole wound section, and if the orifice below is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the cul, and is still more painful for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, the fistula is finished according to this method: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is around the surface of the buttock and on the edge of the buttock, then take a perforated extremity, which is like an awl for preparing the wound in this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And then insert the probe into that fold of skin or around those; and then insert the probe into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates the edge of the buttock nearby, then you extract the skin from that fold where you introduced your finger into the anus; and remove the end of the skin and adjust both ends, and leave them for a day or two, and when more of the skin is inserted into the flesh, cut those parts which are between the two ends of the skin and which cause pain.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then care for the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifices of the fistula do not penetrate, then make them penetrate, however you prepare it, so that it is in the first, which you should not do to avoid injuring the skin; and then apply a bandage where it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spigot that is used to puncture the fistula: the curvature of which is sharp and the other end is not sharp, so that it does not injure that which is not necessary, sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of suturing hernias in which there is swelling at the beginning of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hernias are of two kinds, either between the buttocks like this, which is of carbuncles, or they are with a greasy rash.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those, there are small and large ones, and that the swelling comes from those immediately and is one, and its motions, and its back, and in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that have a swelling in the back like this, which comes from a lack of moisture, of which there is a greenish discharge or a small amount of swelling and continuous, and its color is like this.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is within the belly is to command the patient to lie down and to expire into the belly while the bowels appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you sit and support your elbows or whatever you have on your hand, and then incise those parts of the patient's ribs.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if your elbows are not suitable for those parts due to their moisture and softness, then take those parts with dry cloth or with a cotton cloth or with a piece of woolen cloth, and extract those parts with the tweezers, and then incise those parts and sprinkle some powdered charcoal on the incision, so that they are in place of cauterizing; or cauterize those parts as it is prescribed in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those parts with the other cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the wound does not allow for exit, then cauterize the patient with a cautery in which there is a small bite, and then wash it with that water which is in the belly and which allows for better exit when the patient exhales.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the swollen glands deform the anus, then the cause is usually fleas, and you should remove those with your nail, or with a needle, and scrape them off, and then care for them with the ointment we have mentioned before they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And the one who is to perform the second suture should do it in this manner: take a thread and insert it into a needle, and then extract the swollen glands from the parts above, and make the needle penetrate into the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the part behind the needle, and longitudinally; and then tightly tie the swollen gland to the structure, and then remove the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and leave one of them untouched, so that the excess of the cure comes from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the anus, and place that on the back, and command the patient to lie down.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that entrance open until the chest; and when it is filled, cure those wounds with ointment or other healing method until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Occurring wounds due to dryness of the skin or by constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if you do not have those remedies in that medicine, then use a needle or your nail to make those wounds moist and hold the scabs above, which prevents them from consolidating; and then cure those that are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then use a stronger plaster than the first one that motivated and was excoriated; and then cure those that are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of almsamir, it is clear.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that almsamir is clear, and not if it does not resemble the color of a corkscrew, and it is made throughout the body and especially in the parts below the feet and the ones mentioned, and it is caused by those pains that lead to the body.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then cut that which is inside the circle of the knee, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its place; and then care for that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the second one that is preceded in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Warts are small, sharp, rounded fistulas on the surface of the body, and they cause pain in the joints of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	Its treatment is that you extend and cut that one, or that you remove it with forceps or tweezers.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now the ones that are on both sides and those that are not have been removed with the instrument that I said.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Warts are small, furred or large fistulas on the surface of the body, and when it breaks there, it is centered in the same way as a bite from an ant, and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The care for this is that you take a pen needle or a quill needle, and it should be strong, and place it into the ant hill where it contains; and then rotate your hand with the needle inside the circle of the ant hill, and place it at the surface of the flesh, and remove the ant from its nest.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to do this with a horn needle or iron needle in this way:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part of the needle above the canula should be thin and sharp, not pierced (so it is not perforated), wrapped with what is on top of the patient's skin, where the understanding of him is ablaved and the rotation of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the ant according to what is called in the cauterization of athel in the chapter of cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of the instruments that are administered to give cristeries.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some wounds are made with silver or lead or melted or mallet; and some wounds are made with those instruments small and large according to those that are administered, because the one that is administered in the treatment of small children is small; and the cristeries of those whose sores are foul or painful, they are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The shape of a large and small cristero:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the catheter of him above in which the bag is attached should be wide according to this method; and it should be at a distance where the bag is attached like that time.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	The end of the tube left, which is inserted into the anus, should be narrow (not opened) like a lion, attracting to subtlety; and on one side of the tube two tracks, and on the other side one track, and the width of the track according to the size of the rays and the largest a little.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines of the bladder of an animal or of lamb's wool are placed should be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced by tracks like this when it is rolled up; and if the space between the tracks is the largest of the said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And insert those tracks firmly with firm cotton, or around those; and adjust the bag; and when the bag is placed in it, it should be straight in the tip of the crister between two distinguishing strong constraints, and cristerize that one track: May the quality of cristerizing that one is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be scalded according to the amount of the patient's tolerance; and remember that it should not be too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then the patient should be placed face down on their back, and their thighs raised and supported with a pillow or a blanket; and apply a warm ointment made of oil or albumen of egg or a mucilage of fenugreek or a similar substance to the anus to facilitate evacuation. Then the nurse takes the basin and expresses the contents into it with two fingers until everything in the intestine is evacuated; then remove the basin and the patient lowers their thighs to the side.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if that remedy does not work, hold it as long as possible; and if the patient falls asleep during the entire night, it is better to let them sleep.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you apply that remedy in cases of diarrhea and the patient is conscious, then repeat the cautery until they are healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are fistulas or abscesses in the anus, then use a thin, sharp lancet from those used by children to make incisions.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of healing wounds
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And he has said in the division of wound healing that which is suitable for free, and thus he says the cure of those with money and medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of and according to the location where they occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which wounds are made include punctures with a sharp object, or cuts with a knife, or percussion from a lance, or a blow with a stick, or a stab with a sword, or similar to those of other causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Many wounds that are in the places of the head include those that occur on the skull, neck, chest, abdomen, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And he counts the cure of some wounds because they follow that reason and rule over other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple plaques of the head, for the memory of the compositions will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, it is said that when a simple head plaque occurs and is not a fracture, if it is caused by a stone or something similar, and it has been soaked in water only and is very large and threatens the patient with the danger of abscess, then you should first apply a cephalic trephine, and do not delay; and then extract the stone according to the amount of its virtue, if no other cause prevents trephination, especially if the stone that is in the plaque is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if trephination on the opposite side of the affected plaque; and keep the patient away from movement, heavy food, and heavy meals.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	However, if there is any cause that prevents the minimization; then reduce the food and do not approach meat or fish.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And if an abscess forms in the plaque, place a poultice of bruised bread soaked in rose oil or in honey in which it is stiptic.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are sure of an abscess, then pause over the affected area, if it is recent and its discharge has not changed to that of the powder that I will recommend you to apply soon.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the discharge has already changed to that, then pause over the wound with salves until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or extends into spaces and is not adjusted by lips, then adjust those with sutures according to what I will recommend for their stitches.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound has already been discovered from the bone and flesh, and is not retained by a small suspender, then insert that and care for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to eat foods in which there is grease: caps and forms like theirs, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if there is putrefaction in the wound and does not adhere to the bone, then insert all that rottenness and remove it, and care for that.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these areas there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow, and it is not severed by medical means, then you should examine the artery, and if you find that it is not incised, then you should incise it with a needle or thread; and if necessity requires that what we have said does not work, then you should cauterize where the blood is flowing.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these wounds are simple and small, the cause of their healing is to powder them with this powder, which when applied will consolidate them so that air does not move them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is as follows: take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished charcoal; mix all this into a fine powder, and apply it to the wound, and bind it tightly with a bandage so that it adheres, and it will coagulate in the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then bind it tightly above the wound and leave it there until it is healed, because the medicine will not be effective if it is removed before it has healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And at some point, one might do that alone, when you are not present in these senses and healthy.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this medical operation is performed in large wounds when it is necessary to be placed on those and stretched, and their recent wounds are healthy, the ones that the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then do not use this powder, but first cure those with what we have said, either by placing it on those wounds with honey and water, or by placing it on those wounds with flour of ordure mixed with honey and water until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if the wound is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you remove that which we have said.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will direct the cure of the fractures of the head in this poisonous thing.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the plague occurs in the neck, it is not different in medicine, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves of the neck are cut or the artery, if it is nerves, not in the engine but rather to avoid treatment with that which causes great hemostasis, as well as ziniar and zegi say vetriol and similar to their four nozo to the nerves and contrazo that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place your hand on any part of the plague, because the substance of the nerves is free and its continuation is to the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that which is cured of false medicines, as is caused by washing with warm water, some vinegar in olive oil, roasted or not, and then when washed with warm water and the other stones are minoring according to this manner, and find honey.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the plague is great, then administer sutures, or cut the lips of it, and then cure that with powders before it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the pain is deep or accidents occur in the lowest part of the abdomen, then pierce it in the most prominent location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then separate, dry, ligate, or cauterize that location if necessary to prevent further bleeding.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the ribs of the chest have already been cut and the veins of the collarbone are saved, then adjust the flaps of the wound covering over the ribs of the chest and do not touch them; equalize them and reduce them to their natural shape, and strengthen them with a structure that is appropriate, and let them heal for several days until they are fully healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the pain has already caused fractures in the bones, then puncture those locations, and if there are fragments of bone, remove all of them that you can; and whatever is not visible, let it heal within several days until the wound closes, and it should be separated and the surrounding area should be cleaned.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the pain is recent, then powder the area with the recommended powder.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the pain is caused by an abscess, then cure it with the recommended remedy that will soon come to mind.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the neck pains or similar ones that occur between the shoulder blades and are caused by a spasm, a knife, a cauterizing iron, or a similar instrument.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If the pain is caused by a knife or cauterizing iron, and you observe its depth, then consider whether the patient has breathlessness when lying down; know that the pain is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth and the pain is recent in the patient's side, then place powder on the area of the first hour, and do not strengthen it so that the side does not remain in the depth of the wound and so that it returns to the heart and does not affect the patient, but rather apply attractive poultices and remove those dirty bandages on the same day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the swelling is not present, then place your hand on the patient's chest to allow the liquid to drain from their body; and make sure the patient sleeps on their side so that the liquid in their body can flow out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the swelling has lasted for three days or more without causing spasm, tremor, heart pain, or stricture in the patient, and other symptoms are improving, then you can be sure that the swelling is healing; and then treat it with warm compresses and other appropriate treatments until it is completely healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the swelling is complete and has lasted for a long time, then you can be sure that it has formed a sinus; therefore, treat it through its opening.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the swelling is caused by an incision of a sponge or a knife, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat it with water that precedes sutures, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has already been incised on the bone, and you have already cut through it, then twist the plate and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then insert the instruments that can straighten the plate, which is said to facilitate extraction.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other plates in the other members, the treatment is the same as that which we have mentioned.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plates of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disorder that occurs in the belly is either large, or small, or mixed.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Some of the large ones are in the intestines or nerves of the intestines, so that insertion of them and the stitching of them should be done more forcefully and more subtly.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And disruption of the small ones is done difficultly by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult, so do not wait to insert them at their proper place as soon as possible, because they open and become swollen, making the instrument of that difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is to migrate, since in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in the two species mentioned.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You should know that there are four ways to suture the belly, but two common ones are used for suturing other parts of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other private ones communicate with the other parts of the body, but they are more private in the belly suture.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend you to each one an explanation and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore say that when the part is small and there is no cause of the intestine for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then in one of the two ways: either by patience of the disruption as we have said, or when inflammation comes to the intestine due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And then when that is the case, cover it with a wet cloth soaked in hot water alone, or if you can get it in cold water with squill, and cyperus, and spice, and embrocations at that intestine inside until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Sometimes it is done in a way that has astringency, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And then, when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, you moisten the intestine with water that is covered and sweetened, because for that the instrument of the patient is relieved from pain.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument of the patient is removed from this treatment, then divide the disruption with a small sharp instrument that is not blunted by rust.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is best when it is proper that it not be dry, and not an occupation that requires dryness and failure.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, its shape is like this:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is sharp and pointed, and the other part is not sharp, and its tip is thin, and it is not as thin as a needle, but rather blunt at the end.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And then, when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, then return it to its natural form in its proper place, if possible on top of it, because that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is widespread, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on their side, and support their legs as high as possible above their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place your hand on their head and the other on their chest.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, then you should place your hand and consideration quickly on the opposite side to raise the affected part higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus, you should administer it in large and small doses.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small doses, place the medicine that you have prepared, and make sure that the minister is between your most sensitive fingers, holding the disruption entirely in their hand and adjusting its lips, and gradually move from one stitch to another if any cause arises.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of stitching: you take an needle, or a second needle according to the width of the wound; and hold it at the end of the disruption of the said ring, and pull the needle once, or twice so that you do not put it in the wrong way on the two ends of the thread that are on the other side of the wound, on the other two ends of the suture that is behind the wound; and you have already added two ends of the thread and two ends of the suture, and you make four stitches.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen the double thread in the circle of the needle, and some stitches of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by addition of decency; and then leave the largest of them and put another needle in that, and then tie that with a thread as it is with the first needle; and do not stop doing this until the wound is completely closed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of medium thickness, because thin needles more easily penetrate the flesh; and large needles are difficult to insert into the thread, and therefore it is recommended that they be of medium thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not recommended that the needle be left at the ends of the thread intended for, so that the flesh is not penetrated too easily and that the wound heals before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they should not be extended too much for, so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then insert the tips of the needles so that they do not pierce the patient's body; and place pulverized cotton on the suture, which holds the tips of the needles; and leave them in until you know that the wound is consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of sutures with needles are most suitable for small wounds, as they have in their suture one or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is similar: and you administer the suture to the four tips, of the cord and two tips of the needle, in a way, with a needle that is evenly wrapped in thinness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four tips, reduce the needle from that part of the thread where it began, so that the thread that rises from the wound does not come out, so that the suture is the second suture of cloth in which the threads are strong.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Pause between each stitch the amount of the thick part of the mentioned suture.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is for women.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And this suture I used to close the wound that occurred in a man's abdomen, which was pierced by a knife, and it was a tear of the major intestine, and it was near the intestines about two palms from the intestine at the left side and it was the tear in the left leg; and then I reduced that because the intestine had been out of the wound for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was healed in the space of 15 days or about, and that was cured and healed; and then I applied this ointment for a while, and it was in its positions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and because of a miracle fire, what I did not cure that wound, which was in a place where the wound was not at all or any medicine, but I placed over the wound cold water for two days and frequent baths with melted honey until the fire healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two specific types of suture according to the narrative of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And if you begin with the suture of the cord, and insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And as the needle penetrates the cord and those lacerations in a straight and long direction through the entire body, and leave the end of the suture where you inserted the needle; and make the other end of the needle penetrate from the back part to the front part in the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And as you have finished making that penetration, then make another penetration in the other end of the wound from the front part to the back part; and leave the end of the suture on this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the wound from the back part to the front part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the needle penetrate in the same way as the previous penetration, which makes the suture in the cord at the end of the mirror that is in the part where all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then, approaching from that position and pushing it towards the other side of the bed, remove the needle from the codex where it penetrates, and then return it to that codex and cover the end of the bed that is on the other side with a cloth; and remove the needle from the codex that is on the other side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And then do the same thing again, and do the same thing again in another place, and finish all of that which is deformed according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the total of this method of suturing is that you sew the edges of the pellicies with a needle, so that you sew the bed one side of the part of the codex, and then let go of that other side when you have finished sewing.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second special method of suturing is called Gualia's method, and this is how it should be done for both sides, as recommended by doctors who sew that part to its corresponding part on the other side, so that all parts are connected together naturally; and then apply the end of one side to the other end of that side, and this is done according to your recommendation.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you hold the needle at the end of the mirror, facing your own part of the body, and make it penetrate into that spot, and leave two ends of the thread; then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from one end to the other of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then rotate those needles, and make each one penetrate from the inside of the body to the outside in two other ends of the mirror that are on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suture is better than the common ligature suture, and is the suture that was previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Guilia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And moreover, they said that the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so you insert one needle into each one, and begin with the insertion of the needle that you should use, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the second suture of those that are used to sew the intestines equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When the disruption occurs in the middle part of the abdomen, it is more difficult to suture than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of the medical treatment of plague is the judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The reason is that when you achieve the plague recently from the same source where the air has altered it, and reduce the intestine and cleanse it and prepare it inappropriately, then place powder on it.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then place on it an ointment of alcohol that is present with you and makes a hard, thick paste, and is consolidated and thickened; and cure it as is the cure of other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have the medicines present with you, then place on it a powder that begins to draw out the pus, and change the dressing twice a day as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in cases of simple wounds when the plagues are present.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague may cause damage to the main members, then apply a piece of lion's wool soaked in quality oil, or in roasted oil, and place it around the area where the bones are located and leave it there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, then apply that which has been previously mentioned, and if the infection spreads to the intestine and is made to penetrate deeply into its cavity, then apply a strong stiptic black tea.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You should know that the pus from the intestines is a more reliable remedy than that which is in the thin intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to heal the intestine known as "gegunu" because it does not receive healing from any disease that occurs in it; this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, its great size, and the thinness of its tissue, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If that which comes from the pus is the bandage, and you remove it, then reduce it according to your right hand, which reduces the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has passed through the space and is already white or black, then place your hand on the spot where it becomes dark from the blood, so that there may be no outflow of pus, which contains veins and arteries in the bandage.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert that which is another on that limb, and place two ends of the hand hanging from the part of the bandage behind the wound, so that the attraction of the blood from the wound may be in the cavity of the bandage and emission of the blood from the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the wounds that occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because they saw that person who was wounded in their belly by percussion of the lance and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula, and there was no management or ventositas.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I continued to cure him although he was not consenting to his healing, but I subtly introduced that which heals the wound and consolidates the area.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And then I placed over the patient that which I had prepared to prevent any further damage from the event in his abdomen; and he did not suffer from that event and remained in his usual dispositions, eating and drinking, and was eventually bathed and exercised as before.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced doctors say that when the intestine is torn and small, it should be sewn up in this way: you should take strong needles; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those needles with the thread that has the mouth open over the two lips of the wound; then when you put on those and strengthen your mouth, cut off the cap of the intestine, where it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another stitch in the first one, and do not stop doing this until you have made stitches throughout the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that area and the pain; and remove those things attached to the intestine inside the intestine so that the intestine can be healed, and do not cause harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is also possible that the intestine can be lanced with a sharp needle; and you should grasp the end of these thin strips of intestine, which should be very clean, and then wrap the end of the intestine around this thin strip, and then insert this thin strip into the intestine, and reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing is not other than the second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the pain is great and widespread, especially in one of the thin intestines, then it is not possible to engage in suturing, but only in drainage, and not healing of it at all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the cure of fistulas and abscesses.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You should know that any pain and abscess when it becomes hidden and ancient, and is made into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and does not heal all the time and is not excised, then in any member it is universally called a fistula and we call it that wound.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And secondly, a fistula is indeed a narrow, white, painless lesion that exists in the same cavity as a toothache; and to remember its name, it is called a fistula, that is, an abscess.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in wet people, the humor that causes it is quickly removed in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Sometimes this humor is moved, and it is thin, and thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division, as I said about the wounds, that any ulcer that is not healed or is not in the raw flesh, is not this but one of these causes: one of which is by putrefaction of blood in the wound; or by malicious humor of the body; or because between the wound and the lips there is hard flesh that prevents the natural formation of flesh; or because the ulcer moves; or because the medicine used for its treatment is not suitable; or when corruption catches in the region, and it is pestilence; or by the nature of the region, as in Sardinia, where digestion of evils is difficult, and healing of abscesses by nature is slow; or because there are one or more boils.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Here are some of the main causes, their symptoms, and treatment with various remedies in this section.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And I will now tell you how to treat a fistula, which is made by surgical means.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas can occur in all the parts of the body; among them are those that reach great veins, arteries, nerves, or the spleen, intestine, bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or some joints composed of such a kind as is made of flesh and skin; and among these are those that are closest to the main member and similar to it.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And among these fistulas that follow this method are difficult-to-cure diseases, not receiving treatment, and requiring hard work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any fistula does not reach these places that have been mentioned, and you wait and believe in its treatment, and want to know about it, then try to examine or feel it, and if the fistula follows correctly, and you can find it by this method.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then use a thin probe to investigate it, as the probe's lightness lifts the weight of the patient's body and helps to straighten the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is very horrible, it is not possible for you to put the probe into it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then incise the orifices with their own instruments, as the moisture that you use to clean them also cleans the other orifices and removes it from there.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then carefully inquire, according to the method that is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the long fistula or protruding one is in the cavity of the patient, or if it is a fistula with many orifices and is located entirely above your strength, or your endurance, or the cause of the patient's pain, and similar to the signs and causes of accidents to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have understood all those causes, then proceed to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula close to the joint, or in the location of salt, long from the joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places that I have already told you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When the wound is dry after the first incision, remove what is in that filter and rotten flesh, and what is born in the orifices of the flesh, or from the skin and similar, and cure it within that it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the wound is long and deep, then cut it as much as possible in front of you, and remove all rotten flesh from it; and administer poultices wrapped in acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the wound, which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that to it for some time until the acute medicine corrodes all that is in the cavity of the wound of the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it does not heal by that, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be confirmed to you, then inquire about that and dry it as we have recommended, unless you prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member present as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and it is in any corruption or blackness, then remove that which holds the corruption; and cure that which is inside where the flesh is to be healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and there is no gap as before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and then you expose it again and carefully remove the cause of it and clean it thoroughly, and strengthen it with a firm bandage, and then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And then if it is healed, good; and if not, then know that that corruption is deep within the body, which has not been reached, and therefore you cannot do anything but leave that alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the broken bone is small, or it is possible to pull it out, then use fine forceps that are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if you have the strength to extract all of them, then do so carefully without any cause that weakens your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you face any opposition due to some cause of moisture, and there is no fear or mistake at the beginning, then insert those ligaments or flesh that are there, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to set the bones of your hour, then place a poultice on that area that will soften that area and let it enter where those flesh and ligament bones are, and keep the poultice from consolidating and strengthening the section that you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	However, if you are afraid, place it under the wound submerged in three parts of oil, or under the wound submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in any of the oils, because when those ligaments soften, and the bones are separated from their position, and the attraction of those is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If there is a large bone like those of the thigh or cushion or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the face of it, then rub that resin only behind where that blackness and corruption is standing, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the place where the corruption reaches, and then cure it before it becomes consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend that you have someone who has been in a patient's thigh to hold and assist in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around the age of 30, who has experienced pain in his thigh, and from the parts of which is over the matter of which the matter reaches the thigh, and it is a great abscess, and not because of an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	Then the fire was extended to the thigh amidst the error of the doctors before the abscess was burst, and matter flowed from it, and its cure was postponed until the bed became fistulated, and in the wounds orifices were created which all drained off poison and humidity from the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	Then the patient was treated by many doctors for two years, and fire was not applied to those wounds but in the arm, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the bed of that patient and the matter that flowed from those wounds, which was very thick; and the body of that man was completely yellow and the color of his skin was jaundiced.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those wounds and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I quickly examined all the wounds and found that they extended from all parts of the body.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I showed and inserted into one of the wounds, through which I described a part of the bone, and at the same time I found that it was rotten and corrupted and degenerated; and already a part of the body had penetrated into the mesentery.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And you should have already discovered and prepared that which was covered by the bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And you should have already dissected and prepared that which was not in the bone but that corruption which I had removed and prepared, and you have already discarded it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then place the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it does not consolidate.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then you should have again dissected and discovered over the bone secondarily over the first discovery, and again continued corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And you should have prepared that which appeared from that corruption, and then you should have performed the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you should have discovered over another way and not ceased to incise the bone little by little particularly and to perform the restoration of it, and it was not restored until you had incised about a palm of it, and that extracted from its marrow, and then you should have prepared it with medicine, and it was consolidated better and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	It is not necessary to repeat the operation of excision of the patient's limb unless for the disposition of the surgeon and the scarcity of the patient's tolerance and fear of death, because an accident can occur in all hours due to excessive evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Therefore, the treatment is for complete healing, and nothing is in place of the patient's own flesh; and it is well to position the patient in their own body and return the function of the limb; and it is carried out according to its positions and not against it in any way or cause harm.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the limb is in place of the body that has been recently fractured, then follow this method: and it is that you take a bandage and strong thread at the end of that prominent limb, and command anyone who extends it; and pause that bandage of thickest wool from the first bandage; and put it over the flesh that has been left by the bone, and extend the protruding part of it so that it pulls the flesh to the parts behind, and you uncover the flesh over the place that you want to suture so that the stitch does not hurt the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Pause the table from underneath the bones improperly, for when you do that, it is not forbidden to use the saw that does not corrode the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	Cover the sawing over the rotten area little by little, for if it is in the hollow of the bone corruption and does not appear on its surface, then another method should be used for sawing.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is rotten and not eminent, begin from one continuous piece to another, and the corruption is in the middle or in a separate part, then you should remove the flesh from all parts; and pause the sawing from underneath, and place the saw of the first part where the corruption ends so that the sawing of the other part continues.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if the sawing is according to the location of the corruption, do it a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, insert the saw into the rotten joint, and saw the bone where the other part continues.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in the reason but in the sinew.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is difficult; however, you should inquire about the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and remove that, and clean it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and if any tendon is crooked, correct it for you, when no opposite vein or nerve comes out.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know which are the saws and the serrations to cut these bones, according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and hardness of those; therefore, you should prepare all kinds of instrument suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that that operation means to you in the special case of the instrument that is needed; when you are greatly studied and long and well known in the ways of this art, and testimony of the ways of illnesses, therefore you already have them for yourself that is suitable for each instrument for every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you should form at the end of this chapter the number of simple instruments that you will use in processing, which you will prohibit from being used on others.
Forma de serra:	Forging iron:
Forma de autra serra:	Forging another iron:
Forma de autra serra:	Forging another iron:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forging another large iron:
Forma de ray:	Forging a ruler:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this ruler should be in the form of a star-shaped crown, and its points should be in the form of asterisks.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not advisable to use them only when the joints are corrupted or the mouth is very wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Forging a larger razor than others:
Forma de razori menor:	Forging a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Forging a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Forging another well-made saw: make the arc of it as small as possible and the sharpness of its iron, and the handle of it should be well-made.
Forma de lu:	Position of him/her:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of a razor in which there is a hollow:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another curved-end razor:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of a small razor similar to a needle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of an incisor that cuts the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another one; this resembles a saw, and the end of it is like a saw, and it is used in certain places in the surgery of bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of a saw that is suitable for the surgery of bones that are pierced through:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular and has a sharp tip.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly covered with all the causes that we have said about razors, incisors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the ends of incisors and the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	When the extremities are affected either intrinsically or extrinsically, or when you have treated that corruption for the cure of those medicines and the cure does not bring relief, or sometimes the corruption leaves the member that was not affected by any cause, then in such cases you should insert that member into that hot bath to remove the corruption, so that the patient may escape from that greater harm to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that person who has been affected is that the member becomes black within the time when the fire has already burned it, or if it swells up and enters into that member which is already there and takes over the whole body; and therefore I advise you to insert that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if the cause of the corruption is the pressure of some poisonous causes such as from a scorpion mar or from a viper or from a rattle-snake and similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or pressure is in the extremity of that member, then you should insert that member and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the main body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if you approach the wound, then insert the needle into the edge of the fireplace, and do not give space to corruption until it takes hold in the fireplace of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you want that one, then insert the arm inside the code at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption passes around the code, then that one is the death of the patient; and in the treatment of that quantity of virtue, administer other causes.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, do the foot when corruption passes over the toe of the foot, then insert it inside one of the nuts.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take hold of the heel of the foot, then insert the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it can enter into the knee, then insert the leg inside the joint of the knee.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already reached the knee, then in that case there is no cure, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of inserting the member or cutting it is that you tighten the ligament in the part that was left last, and tighten another ligament on the spot; and extend the assistant a ligament to the parts behind, and extend the assistant another ligament on top; and you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments a span wide until all the flesh is discovered; and then insert or cut.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And let there be placed a cloth of all parts over the wound so that it does not touch the area, and let the patient's injury and abscess be adjusted and treated carefully.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if blood flows when you work, then cauterize the area continuously, or place some powders that restrict the bleeding on it; and then return to your treatment before it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a bandage to the injured member at the appropriate place, and cure that before it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And you should also recommend to that person who has such an accident in his foot, the same type of accident that you and I have recommended, which occurs because of the black color in his foot due to a burn that is similar to a fire burn.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurs within his own foot before it spreads throughout the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that person prepared for himself some medicine that was more effective than the cure going to the member with the intensity of his pain and burning of it, and the unsuccessful treatment did not heal the foot at the joint, and it became healthy.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, it has been known that this disease affects the mentioned part of the body.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me, and I perceived that this excess of the aforementioned substance, which is placed on the face of the medicines, is due to the purification of the body of the patient; and if it does not cause a reaction, it begins to go to another part of the body.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And I was told to incise the face of the patient, but I did not want to do so hoping for the reaction of that excess, and more than fearing the beginning of the incision of the face of the patient dead, because the virtue of the patient was uncertain.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he was disappointed with me, he returned to his country and reached me that that man prepared and incised his whole face, and was cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narrative except to be helpful in what is done with this disease, and that it has meaning by which it is meant and by which it is done.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the care of the sinews and quality of the castor oil with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When abscesses occur in fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the place looks like a vessel, and the codex that is above it is covered with fine cloth, and it does not reach deep corruption, and it does not press on bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinew, and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged until the corruption reaches a member, then it is called a fistula and does not heal.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is to insert that codex entirely as it is rolled up, and more so when it is thinned and made with cloth, and you make sure that it does not stick to the place due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you hope that the codex will stick and that that corruption has not been achieved due to deep consequence, and in the codex there is a spot on the face, then you treat it with a castor oil.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you should consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the brace that yields an odor of fat, then use this Egyptian remedy which is made of oil, vinegar, and zinc received in equal parts, and adjusted in a vessel, and its coats over the fire until the medicament becomes honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and cleanse the sinus with that, and strengthen its outlets, and leave the medicine in it for a quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that spice; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the pudor remains.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some of those days are cleaned with ash water, when you are not present this medicament; and you should take the ash from wood, and put it on the water; and then add that and cleanse that with it until you confirm that the sinus is now open.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then cleanse that wound with honey and melted lead mixed together, and cleanse it with vinegar and honey mixed together, because honey melts and washes, and vinegar makes it stick and more so when there is an excess of stipulation and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have done this several times and feel that the wound has recovered, then cleanse it with water that makes flesh in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And if you take some finaline and dissolve that oily vinegar and vinegar stiptic; or if you cleanse it with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties written in the treatise of ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the wound are narrow and cannot receive the needle of the syringe, then slowly expand it with that small iron until it is expanded.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the anus is dilated, then you add the lips of it with sutures and leave the amount in which the space between the buttocks contains additional.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the anus of which the intestine passes through is raised to the parts above, then dry that in the lowest place that is in it so that the intestine can pass through behind, because when the intestine is constricted in the presence of sinus, the flesh in it is generated.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the lowest environment of the largest bone according to what you want, then prepare the member for the preparation that passes through which the intestine usually passes through according to what is appropriate and that there is no cause in it that holds the intestine.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative remedies that are placed on the sinus appropriately for that which you want to extend over that on a cloth of lime.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such great quantity that it covers all the sinus; and then insert the forceps in the correct direction of the anus of the sinus, a slightly wider than the anus of the sinus; and then extend over another cloth of lime from the eyes of leopards according to the quantity of the trough, and place it over that for a long position of the anus of the sinus so that it is separated from the feces of it and does not hold the cloth greatly but instead holds it appropriately with a few days of a little wool.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May one who is above the opening of the sinus, which remains open at all times to prevent that which is adjusted in its place from coming out.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know whether what comes from the arm is matter or little, or is digested, or is not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And if you consider the location of that sinus, whether there is pain in it or not, and if it is in the abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And if your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter that is secreted over the opening of the sinus has adhered, or has formed an adhesion, then you should remove it or tear it apart on the third day, and when you remove the plague, then change the dressing and renew the poultice.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May one who is above the sinus approach the space where subtle viruses are, for the healing of which you should not despair of the adhesion of it, because the healing of that takes time, as in some people in which generation of flesh in those wounds takes a long time, and from those in which it is done the opposite of that.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the sac is found to be filled with undigested food, it means that the sac does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sac is delayed and prolonged, then adjust in the desiccation of medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dry as soon as they are added with a decoction of diarrhea, when they are in the adjustment with an excess of cinnamon.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	The most effective remedy is to take a decoction of diarrhea and dissolve it in rose oil, and place it on the affected area, and use that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	This is similar to that action, when there is no undigested food, use honey when it is thickened, and use that; or take mira and aloe and make a powder, and sprinkle it all over the honey when it is on the fire, and apply this mixture to the sac; and sprinkle the powder over cloth and strengthen that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Some people administer long-lasting and radiant astrological remedies (and it is the celestial lily) and flour of eggshells and centaury, and use those simples or adjustments, trim those and crush and powder over the honey that has been recommended; and use that.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the sinew is not healed by this remedy, then you know that the corruption is in the bone of it, and it has already been examined in the bones or other hard members or in the ligaments; then cure it with the fistular remedy as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the treatment of broken nails and toenails, and added incisions of the finger and sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	The nail is an abscess that has not been present at the finger of the hand or foot, and it often occurs in other similar ones, and if it continues to be valued and its treatment is highly prized, or it is a caustic abscess, or it is corrupted, and quickly decomposes and rots the tip of the nail, and it quickly rots all of it, and quickly pervades its corruption into the bone until it smells fetid, and the end of that limb is blackened.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have that same iron that we mentioned in the division and do not compare your cure, then cover it so that you insert the entire excess that remains from the nail, and then cauterize the area near that, as a pointed cautery is helpful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is healed and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already joined the flesh to the parts divided, and they begin to prick and lead that one to that, then cover it so that you place a thin cloth underneath the angle of the nail that punctures the flesh, and push that one through and insert that flesh with ease, and then place over it what remains of the flesh from the medicines that were burned corrosively until it is completely healed; and then cure that one.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if the corruption has already entered the bone, then cover it so that you insert that bone and the extra, because there is no time when that bone in the corruption will be healed.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you see the corruption and decay in that, then insert it into one of the nuts according to what is remembered, and cure it within the time when it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the toenail is broken or torn off, and there is severe pain in that area, then first apply a bandage to the patient, and then dry the toenail with a sharp cutting blade across the transverse section above it, and be careful not to cut into the flesh that is below the toenail, because you will cause the patient severe pain and unnecessary damage to the adjusted flesh in that area; and cure that area with this.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	This is not adjusted, which is not found in the bodies of most men, but it is fleshy all over, and it is often in the bones, or it is in the toenail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And it is not found in the joints of the body, or it is the origin of that in some of those nuts.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	When born from those nuts of that tree, the first is not bad, and the second born at joints is weak.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	Of those born without flesh, the section is lighter, and you should insert that one into its own cavity with a flat blade.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	When born from the joint's cavity, the cure is difficult; therefore, watch out for its abscess.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When born from those nuts of that tree, you should insert the flesh at the beginning into the round opening around the bone, and then use one of those suitable saws to cut it, and cure it while it is healing.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	When the consolidation occurs between those bones that are bent or by the birth of the man who was born with it, or by the consolidation of plague or by burning by fire, or by similar things, then cut that consolidation before they return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their clothes some oiled rags so that they are not consolidated too lightly, and separate between those, or place between those one thin layer of plaster until it is consolidated according to what you see.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if there is a consolidation in the palm of that hand, then dry it according to how it is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	At the beginning of the joints, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	The joints are varicose, and their veins are thick and full of melancholic superfluities that come out of the members of the body, and the most common place for them is in the abdomen, and especially in the abdomen of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you should administer a purge of the body to relieve black bile, some of which is strong enough to expel it, and then draw blood from the patient's great vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure for them is done in two ways: one is that it should be incised and thrown out the black bile, and the other way is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The drying of it is done in this way: first, the abdomen is anointed with oil until the black bile is resolved, which is feculent from the abdomen, and then strengthen the patient's abdomen to the most superior part of the couch under the thighs, and then dry the vein at one, two, or three places, wide section, and then raise the black bile above the lower part of the thigh into the body, and out from the top, until the amount and number of times you want to take it, and the patient bears it.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then approach that one, and command them to refrain from eating foods that generate black bile causing gout.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment with leeches when the veins are full and that does not help the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of their leg should be done in this way: you who raise the patient's leg, if it is swollen with edema, and then place it in hot water and massage the leg with a tail of a snake until it becomes red and the veins are exuded; or it should be exercised by exercise strong, if bathing is not at your present, until the member is scalded.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then apply the codeine in the direction of the vein for sectioning in the long or back of the patient's foot, or at the bottom of the patient's foot you should give it as a drop, or at the bottom of the patient's foot you should give it as a tale.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then apply the codeine with one drop and excoriate the vein from all parts until it appears at the sensation, and it should be appreciated that the patient who sometimes that question declines to black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so, when you have taken out and from the codex you used that white thread as a string.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then place your hand in that hole where it is raised and shaken from the codex, and hang that lion's claw on it.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then cut another section close to that section for three times, and then scrape the codex from the part above the vein where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then lift that and insert it into the back section of the tail, and then extract it and lift it into where it is inside the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do that into where you extract it from the section that is most superior or most different from all the sections, where everything is inside; and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to extract and lift, then insert a strong double-bladed needle and tie it to it and extract it, or insert the thread behind it and rotate your hand at all parts where it is shaken.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it is difficult to lift that part and it comes out over the patient, causing harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the whole area has been cut out, place your hand on the wound covered with wool soaked in wine and oil, both rotten and unrotted, and heal that wound until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is twisted and has a tortuous shape that does not follow the straight line as we have said, then cut it at all the parts of its tortuosity and in the places where it is wrapped, and suspend it with forceps until you lift the whole of it.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful that you do not cut the vein and do not wound that part, for it is difficult to lift that part; and use your prudence in that matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision made on the vein:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of a hook:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be sharp as the forceps or have a sharp tip to avoid wounding the vein; and it should be made of flexible lion's claw, because if it is too thin, it will cut the vein by its thinness; having enough thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of extraction of the vein from the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the hollows of lowlands, as in Aetius in the Arabian lands and in the dry and barren lowlands where there is little greenery.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is often generated in other parts of the body besides the hollows.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its action is of putrefaction that comes from the feces, as with poisonous worms and tapeworms and roundworms and other worms generating between the feces and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the susceptibility to the occurrence of this vein is due to this vein that happens in the hollow and inflamed; and if the location is blistered, the vein should be opened from the place of that blistering, which seems reasonable from the plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then with the appearance of this, you should wrap around it a weight of lead from which the foot is like a drag of one drag, and do not let go of that and leave the lead suspended from the hollow.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so many times when some reason causes those parts to be distorted, wrap that in a poultice and place it on the affected area.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then you insert a piece of it and wrap it around; do not insert that which is still inside until it is outside, because if you insert that, it will be twisted and go into the flesh and cause abscess and poisoning in the area and ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it may be treated properly and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the back of it and there is no longer any cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it is extracted in some people who are in their length of 20 palms and 10 digits, and I have found that it reaches up to 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is inserted during the time of its treatment, then insert the ray into the tract of it and pierce that through the long tract to the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the area for several days with medicines; and cure that by the cure of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has some wounds, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes to that place very painful, and it is taken from which orifice it comes.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And then cure that which we have said in the division and apply that which is above mentioned.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section of worms generated under the skin and it is called cattle sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is not named in any land because it has many wounds on the animals and it is a worm that is not between the skin and flesh, and it goes through all the body puffing up and falling down, and it is shown at the feeling of its own member to member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is by the putrefaction of some humors which happen to be worms and serpents and earthworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for the harm of that, because when it goes into the body and is raised to the head, and reaches the brain, then very strong fever occurs in the body and enters and destroys the brain, and that causes many wounds.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to cure that and extract it, first do not force its movement and appearance to the sense, and then hold tightly what is above it and what is below it with a thin and strong bandage, and then dry it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and not exposed, then place a pointed cautery with fire over the location where it is, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of it which corrupts the location as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see that it has reached the top of the bone, then tightly hold over the supercilium with a strong structure, and then dry it and extract that; and then have the patient use medicines to evacuate bad humors, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of section above pain.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is not named in our land gout, and it is the pain that occurs in various members, and it moves from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen the second one that I will tell you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and it had been there for an hour, I saw that inflammation move like worms in this way, but more slowly than it would be if it were live silver when moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain of that place disappeared and remained in the muscle, and it was like this for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it corrected itself in the other arm until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then it recommended to me that it turned around in all her body after I saw it; and it was too wonderful about the change of it and the speed of member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen that in the lower legs after that way, but I had not seen words that could explain how pain could be mutated from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I have not seen that thing in women as it is in the female body.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I have not thought that it was because the woman was old, with dry bodies and exposed veins, and in this case the sensation of that warmth is changed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this aftercare not appear in those who are delicate and have bodies humidified with veins constricted.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And as you want the cure for it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not apply the heat to that place as we have said, but strengthen it and rub it gently on that part until it is inside that warmth covered, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see that thing in the thighs, then cure that exclusion of the body and that which expels warmth, and carminatives those bad pills and serapi pills and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of sage.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sage is diverse according to the species, and according to the parts of the body in which they are found, because of their diversity is that some have large points, and small ones, and concave, and dull, and solid; and from them some have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have stars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	When it comes to the second part of the body and the feet in which the cause is found in two ways: firstly, the main members such as the brain, heart, lung, liver, kidneys, and bladder, and similar parts; and when pain occurs in any of these members and you notice signs of death, the cause should be removed immediately, and when the symptoms do not appear in the major dispositions, and when you do not find these signs, and the cause is not hidden deep within the member, then extract it and treat the affliction.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When symptoms occur in the servant's body and cross the bone, and are above the cyphac which is on the brain, because of the vehement soda, scotoma, vertigo, pain in the temples, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding and vomiting of anger, and great fear is abscised from the word and the voice is destroyed, and it is above the location of the wet white substance similar to pollen, and it has a similarity to the adhesion of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if you find yourself in such circumstances, then you should refrain from the cure and extraction of the sage until it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the symptoms of the sage are close to the heart, which is located on the right side, and feels like a hard cause, not a soft one; and its movement is similar to the movement of the polyp, and comes from the black plague, and that fear and coldness of the extremities, and sweating, and shivering; and then you know that death is approaching.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the symptoms when the sage has completely filled the lungs with black foam from the plague, and the vessels that are close to the neck become inflamed, and the patient's color changes, and they breathe heavily and demand a breath of fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the sage is in the membrane that is in the chest, and the pain is close to the small ribs, and it is made by a great sudden pain and a great groan, and does not affect all the members of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If the saw is used in the stomach, then strong vomiting of undigested food may occur.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the saw is inserted into the abdomen and remains there, some intestine, cloth, or intestine that is torn may be expelled, and there is no hope of healing from its extraction.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the saw is inserted into the bladder, and urine is expelled from it, and some cause of death occurs from this, and there is great pain in the patient, then know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Just like the face, neck, and shoulder, and back, and ribs, and the scapula, and the breastbone, and the sternum, and the ribs, and the scapula, and the back, and the neck, and the face, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the saw does not pierce vein or artery and is not a poisonous saw.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recommend this to you who have seen that these saws are of this kind, so that you know how to use them for the cure of the patient.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is that in a man, a cyst forms in the lacrimal duct of his eye, and it is extracted from there to the other side, behind the ear of his head, and it is healed, and does not cause harm to the man's ear.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And another cyst was extracted from a Jew in his ear, behind the ear, and the cyst had already been hidden and could not be removed except for a small part that adhered to his skin, and it was a large cyst among the sharp cysts of the Turks, with no eardrums.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was healed, and there was no harm to his ear.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And another cyst was extracted from a Cretan man in which it was located in the groin, and it was an Arab cyst, and it was this one that had eardrums; then he inserted something into it between two fingers, and it was already submerged in his groin; then he carefully removed it, and the Cretan man was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And another surgeon extracted a sword from a man who had fallen on his belly, and he thought that he would die from it; and since it had passed thirty days and he was not moved for any reason of his condition, he inserted it into the wound and closed it over it, and he was healed, and no harm came to him from the accident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And then another man fell with a sword in his back, and the wound was closed over him, and after seven years, the sword became stuck in the skin.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And then a woman fell with a sword in her belly, and the wound was closed over her, and she was not moved from her condition, and the woman did not suffer any harm in some of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And then another man fell with a sword in his face, and the wound was closed over him, and he did not suffer much pain from this, and similar symptoms to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And the sword was extracted from the man of the king's prince who had fallen in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the direct part, and the whole sword was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	I was called to treat her within three days in the sick person's bed.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I again examined the patient's wound; and then I asked that person who was skilled in such matters, but I did not find them; rather, I felt the pain near the third rib, and then I suspected that the pain was from the patient's side.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied a plaster in the place that has both constrictive and digestive virtues, confident that this place would help me to see the patient's side, so that I could remove it from there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And I did not notice any significant accident in the place where the patient had reached; and I continued to apply the plaster on her for several days without any accident; and the wound healed gradually, and the patient remained out of bed for several days until one day she felt pain in her stomach and told me about it.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied an acute and corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it was ready; and I asked that person who was skilled in such matters, and I removed it from there, and again examined the patient's side, which adhered to the skin.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then approach and adjust in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until I can see the end of the spear, and pass through it for several times within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then approach and apply pressure to the wound as it becomes more inflamed, and insert the forceps into it, and remove them, and do not overlook any details, you will continue to subtly and ingeniously work on that with various instruments until one day you can hang it from those instruments like a hook, according to the shape of those at the end of the capital, until you extract it; and then restore the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And according to doctors, the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and you restore it and the wound becomes consolidated, and the patient is healed completely, and there is no harm in it in any case.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some spearheads for which you can understand and interpret that which I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by narrative or interpretation of them.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled craftsman knows how to compare the few above the motive; and he knows what is present with what is absent; and he must acquire new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes in the art when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And thus it is said that wisdoms are not erased from the members in which they are fixed but rather by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which they are inserted; or by the opposite of the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is erased by the place in which it is inserted, or wisdoms proceed in a fleshy place, and are attracted and erased.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the command of the hour in which it is catched, then cover it and leave it for several days until the flesh that is around it rots, and the attraction of it and its exit are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly if it is fixed in bones and does not obey your command, then leave it for several days and repeat the attraction and moisture on each day, and it will be erased.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not obey your master's command to approach those days, then it is customary for you to pierce the skin around the joint in that bone of each part until that place is widened by the saw, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the saw is stuck in the bone of the head and has already passed through one of the intestines of the brain, and it appears in the patient with those accidents that I have mentioned, then stop the extraction of the saw and leave it inside until it is equal to the master's command; for if the saw reaches the skull, the death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the saw is not stuck in the body of the bone but only on the outside and does not pass into the skull, and the patient remains alive for many days, and no accident occurs due to those accidents, then you engage in the attraction of the saw and the attraction of it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is stuck and you do not obey the extraction command, then administer sawdust around the saw as we have recommended, and cure the place until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the wound has already been covered in the body's location, and is covered by sensation, then you should inquire about that area, and if you feel that area, then you should apply those remedies that are suitable for its attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the crowding of the wound and its length, and there are no nerves or veins, then you should perform on the wound through which it can be amplified and from which the wound can be extracted.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have those remedies that should be held, then you should remove the flesh in which it is attached from all parts and make an incision according to what you can do; and work on that, if you cannot on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the ribs and twisting of those through which it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the wound in any location where it is, then you should use your hand with forceps to all parts that make that obedience; and subtly work on the subtlety that the wound is not broken and that it is made to your difficult attraction and from that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do it in the same hour, then leave it for several days until the parts that are in the circuit of the patient can be joined, and then repeat the procedure when the patient is relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if it causes counteraction of the blood flow, then administer what we have said about cure in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your skill in the beginning of the vein or nerve or cord, and administer it in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the poison; and do this for its facility, tranquility, delay, and firmness as if you were doing it yourself and according to your recommendation.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, make the poison counteract in such a way that the patient is in the figure according to which you should cast the cure of the poison in him, which is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But if the poisons that are outside of the other part, or that have already affected some parts to the other parts, or cause softness in the extrusion of the poison due to the sensation of the part below the neck and sometimes eminently; then you should cut it off from there; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps are taken.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bone, then slowly turn the blade against the second contradiction before the saw enters the bone, and enlarge it as you insert it, and then remove that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Or, leave it for several days, and then reinsert it when it is possible.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the saw is in that, then slowly push that against it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If it has fallen out and you want to administer impact, then insert it into that, if it is deaf, make a hollow in order for the concavity of it to fit into the blade of the saw and then push that against it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the saw is concave, then slowly push that against it, because the saw is attracted by it.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the saw is poisoned, then make sure that you hollow out all the flesh in which it is located, if it is possible for you to do so, and then treat that with what is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the saw catches on the chest, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and is close to where you touch that with the tent, and it is possible for you to cut over that, then cut over that and be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, and then remove that, and afterwards apply a plaster if necessary, and treat that before it becomes healthy.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps used to grasp the teeth:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	With their ends shaped like a beak that are made like a vice when placed on the tooth to prevent it from being loosened:
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those there are special types, large, thin, and flexible, according to the size of the tooth and its thickness, and the width of the jaw, and its construction:
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of concave impeller with this end shaped like a beak in order to facilitate the instrument's insertion into the tooth and its impulse against that deaf one:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of impeller for deaf end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	shaped like a ray in order to facilitate the instrument's insertion into that concave tooth and its impulse against it:
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of venapuncture.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of venapuncture, which are usually punctured with their needles, the sixteen of which are two pulsatile veins located at the temples, called alhasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimals of two cheeks that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guidegials that are at the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are left the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	When the veins that are located in the chest are cut, one of them is called cephalic, and it is also known as wild grape; the people call it "the cap vein", and it is deaf, and it is a migratory vein, and it is composed of one branch from the basilica, and another from the cephalic; and they name that vein in the people "the vein of the whole body", and the basilica is the vein that is located in the domestic thigh, and it is called "citillar", and they name that vein to the common people "the belly vein"; and the arm vein, and it is located above the fire, and it is the vein that is cut, and it is the vein that appears on the foot for apparent manifestation; and the saphenous vein, and it is the vein that is between the inner ear and the smallest inner ear, and it is located in the two grooves.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the leg and thigh there are three veins; one of them is located behind the curvature of the wild grape; the second is saphenous, and its location is behind the domestic thigh; and the sciatic vein, and its location is behind the wild grape thigh; and in the thigh there are other similar veins.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The swelling of the veins that are close to the armpits is an ancient and persistent disease, causing ulcers on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of the treatment I recommend to you is that the head of the patient should be shaved, and the head of the patient in the occipital region where the veins are ample with good friction; then strengthen the patient's neck with a band that appears on both sides and their locations are close to the armpits; and ask for that one, and if you feel the pain of those, here is the remedy.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the lancet, and that one that is incisive, and then introduce it behind the vein in the hollow where the flewbotomus comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand over the vein and the hollow, and cut the vein with an incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be about two digits or around that; and make it as deep as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then apply strong herbs and leave them inside to be healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already preceded at the beginning of the book, the initials of those and their cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Of the two veins and arteries that are at the temples, the improvement of phlebotomy is ancient and side evil and often obtained and courses of excessive fluids poured into the veins.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is the second that I recommend to you: strengthen the patient by inserting a needle where the two veins appear at the sensation for manifestation and demonstrate their polarity by your own hand; then you will know.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you will raise the cord above the vein at the parts according to your own hand, and introduce the phlebotomy incidence behind, and raise the vein up; and insert that as you have done in the other two veins; and make the blood flow according to the amount of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then remove the bandage from the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place it over that cotton and herbs and leave them inside to be healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And if it is preceded by their remembrance, and of those who have begun, and the attraction at the beginning of the free.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the judgment of flebotomy of the front vein is approaching the flebotomy of the cephalic to the ancient maladies of the face and to emigration and rogue and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the flebotomy of it is that you have recommended to me; so it is that the patient strengthens their neck with a cloth in which appears the vein; and then take the instrument called the fossorium, of which this is the form of it:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	And place the point eminent on that vein at the top of the fossorium above it and strike it with a pen or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood run according to the quantity that you wish; and then remove the puncture from the patient and strengthen that within which is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some veins are opened by the flebotomy long, however not that the flebotomy is of acute extremity as with the other flebotomies, before the extremity, and flebotomy that one according to the transverse, because the bones are prop and very difficult to break in the vein when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	When the inflammation of the two veins that are near the tear ducts of both eyes due to scabies in the eyes and inflammation in the eyes, and to facial diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the lancet is that the patient holds his neck firmly with a strap, and then you place the lancet there, and you stand over his head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And if the lancet is made transversely along the length with a slight point, where there is no flesh; and if the lancet is sharp, then the end of it is broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let blood flow from the vein until it is necessary for you, and place your hand over those wounds, and hold them with a bandage, and then remove those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	When the lancet from the nasal vein is compared to acute fever and violent sweating, and to facial diseases such as scabies and inflammation that occur on the face, and especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the phlebotomy in him is that the patient strongly bends his neck and brings his own nose to your left hand, and takes the phlebotomy needle long and places it in the middle of the back of his second straight, because the vein does not appear here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Cover that you slowly move your hand with the phlebotomy needle little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and then apply it to a bandage, because that is restored much better.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the value of the phlebotomy of the four elements be constrained to the beginning and end of leprosy and other diseases, and to motas malautias and inpetige and bad ulcerative corrosive ones as well as herpetic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the phlebotomy in those is that the patient strongly bends each one in his neck with the bandage; and the artist is on the head of the patient, and the patient is lying on a bed.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then slowly widen the artery along its length with a small, pointed needle; and remove as much of the second substance or as much of the second substance that is necessary to be removed; and do the same with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then remove the membrane and strengthen both veins with a thin, narrow strip of material to prevent the patient from being frightened, and leave it inside until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the use of the needle in veins is similar to the treatment of small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around them.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the needle lancing is that you do it yourself, and strengthen the collar of the patient with a band, and then rotate the lips of the patient and look at both veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the color of each of those, and that which is more is that in the circumference of those small black veins; and then incise each from the beginning.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you have any doubt about which of those is the correct one, then you should examine the most prominent and clear of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the upper lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary to cut the two veins that are on the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	It is customary to apply the lancet of the cephalic vein to the locations that are in the gum, to the patient's tongue, and to other parts of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of performing this procedure is that you should follow the patient's instructions between your thumbs, and lift their tongue, and observe from behind the tongue, on one side of the vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform the lancet on each one; and be careful that your hand does not touch those veins, because they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are punctured in the belly, which is where they run through all men, and the puncture of them is made in two ways, either by pricking with a lancet or olive oil to a subtle declination; or by cutting with a scalpel, and applying pressure, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	This pressure is what is suitable for section and of those that are special, thin, and subtle according to the size of the veins and according to the structure of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of lancet puncture:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	its length is as follows, and it is suitable for opening convex veins full of thick blood, and those that contain thick blood clots.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of lancet olive oil:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this lancet is of smaller length and more subtle tip, and it is suitable for puncture of thin veins that contain thin yellow bile.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The main vein of the basilica vein is one of three veins: it extracts the blood from the abdomen and the chest, and from that which goes to the chest and the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And summon the phlebotomist, when phlebotomy is done there, who will guard that place and be above-tense in that place, where there is an artery, and if it err and adjust in the puncture of the phlebotomy, incise that artery and cause blood flow from the sanctum, so that no one phlebotomizes that place without phlebotomy being done there, before slicing with a lancet.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear by manifestation, then you should leave that place and move to another, or surround some of its branches; or phlebotomize in the place of the end of the arm, where that is manifest, and slice it with a lancet as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you want the phlebotomy of the upper arm, then you should first feel the structure of the arm that you touch the place before knowing the location of the elbows, and then press on the arm; and then bend the arm and slice the vein with a concave section with a lancet as we have said; and guard yourself that the percussion does not cause damage to any part of the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, as you stretch the ligament, inflation in the place where you have well-placed your hand, then that inflation is an inflation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flowing in the femoral artery as thin as the golden hair of an infant, and the blood is very fine, then know that it is from the blood of the artery; and then cover and press your hand on that for a long time; and after removing your hand, if the blood is abscinded, then move your arm away from that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And guard the patient from the bedclothes of their bed, and be overly cautious with them and do not move that for several days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood is not abscinded, and you see that you must not present medicine to that, then insert the artery, if it appears to you; for its extremity is contracted, and the blood is abscinded; or take a pincer, and do that, and take one hand and stretch that over the place of the vein with stricture descending to the ligament and to the bones through the other side.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the wound is amputated, it is well; and if not, then cure that part of the body where the amputation was planned according to the previous remembrance of the location of the powders for amputation.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The amputation of the wound from that part is difficult due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the dark vein is used for flebotomy, it is very useful to extract the wound from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And the flebotomist should be careful about the flebotomy of that part, because it is near a nerve; and therefore, if he adjusts the needle of the flebotomy and punctures the nerve, it will cause great pain, and it is difficult to heal that part, and often it does not heal completely. And this nerve appears subtle to some people and is not shown, so the flebotomist should be careful when performing flebotomy on that part and avoid the nerve with his strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then you should cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of venipuncture of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and relieves the symptoms of headaches.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And if you want the venipuncture to be done properly, then have it done by a skilled phlebotomist or a skilled acupuncturist; because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not involve the artery or nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you must ensure that the phlebotomist does not puncture the back of the elbow only, but also around the area, and does not notice it, if not by the first percussion test that is sometimes done before venipuncture.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, in some men, it is often found that an abscess forms when it is not punctured in the first percussion test, and they do not notice it until later.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of venipuncture in that case and its complications, in which you should consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first one is of the type of phlebotomy that is administered only for the preservation of health and for hope of the patient and caution against the occurrence of diseases, and that phlebotomy should be done from one of the veins that are in the body, such as cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and that phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of primevespera, after breakfast in primevespera and autumn, and in winter at dinner, when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be done and the third day or on the first day after three hours have passed since morning.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Phlebotomy that is administered, more when it is necessary and convenient to that, or of blood or of day, at all hours and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And the type of person who should not be phlebotomized until they are fourteen years old, and women who should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month until the seventh, and the elderly who have passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wants to perform phlebotomy for any reason, let them first examine their veins with a lion's claw, and hold the opening in place, so that the excess blood does not flow into the phlebotomy of the veins, which are pure, and do not prolong the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not perform phlebotomy on those who are suffering from nausea and drunkenness, nor should they be evacuated from illness or drunkenness until that has passed, nor should it be performed on those with hydrate, and more that phlebotomy should be feared in colic passion and vomit, and in stomach, and in multiplication of cost and work and exercise of breakfasts or vigils and in all cause that dissolves the virtue, whether it is corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider in the subtilization of humors whether the body is heavy, with food and drink, and with medicines if that is possible for that.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And if appropriate and no cause prevents, or it is exercised by some exercise to prevent the joint from becoming stiff.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the phlebotomy of it on the chest during the day, around the hour of noon, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And pierce that chest of that person is guarded on that day from all animal misfortunes, as we have said, such as anguish, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as we have said, such as labor and excessive pain, and joy and similar things to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And to their seat make sure the causes are present in the use of which customarily men have for aromaticity and odor, and baths and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is put out or that of that person who should be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And if appropriate, extract the arm, and wipe that with the hand of the phlebotomist three or four times; and then tighten the bandage and wrap those three or four times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the stricture is too cold, when it is not equal, or the stricture is superfluous, then prohibit the flow of the bile; or it is softening, and then prohibit the body from moving completely.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And if the stricture is too cold, when it is not equal, or the stricture is superfluous, then prohibit the flow of the bile; or it is softening, and then prohibit the body from moving completely.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And if the stricture is too cold, when it is not equal, or the stricture is superfluous, then prohibit the flow of the bile; or it is softening, and then prohibit the body from moving completely.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for that reason, the fleubotomist should be stopped and kept in mind in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then remove the fleshbottle, but if the vein is punctured in a wound, then it bleeds; and if not, you repeat that process again in another place near that location, or over the wound if it is not inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is inflamed or the patient becomes frightened, then leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the wound, because it would cause more inflammation or not heal properly.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the fleshbottle process if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the puncture is small and the wound is healing slowly, and you fear that it may not heal enough, then repeat the fleshbottle process in that location with proper alignment and adjust the puncture by a little, and make that wound inflamed until the location is inflamed, because the location becomes inflamed in some people due to too much puncturing.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you see that it has already become inflamed, then do not repeat over it, because it would not help and would cause more harm; and place some cloth on that wound, because it would help the healing process.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place that oil and other oils be used.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, a wound of oil is administered in all flebotomy through which the veins are pierced, and they do this by using a Triagical and Sagazene needle when it is placed on one of those over the area, so that the blood is subtilized and rotated when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the location of flebotomy a large abscess is generated, which occurs due to bad weather conditions, and more so in that which has not been drawn blood but only the bad weather, or in the puncture of the vein, and then you cover it, and place a sponge soaked in water and salt on the spot, a little heated, and strengthen it with it for an hour, so that it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And make sure to do this near the yield of that blood from that vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is any blackness or greenness in the location for several days, do not do this; and if you want, place on it some cause of willow and of mint dissolved, or some cause of suc de mentastre or of calament or a similar cause of that.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	When wounds become infected and form abscesses or swellings, they should be lanced with a lancet from the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand over that area, and if you feel softness there, then apply compression to that area, otherwise that swelling is bad and harmful; and therefore guard yourself from placing your hand on that area for any reason that we have mentioned, which could cause bleeding from the aorta.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a styptic to that area to make it resistant, and then care for that wound with the other treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And cover the wound with a bandage that extends from the aorta to all of man according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color that remains on the aorta after it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	And if the aorta is black, then leave it inside until it turns red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then leave it inside until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, then wait until its sharpness is softened.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And when the person is tall and strong and has a need for extraction of pus from a boil, which should be enlarged by incision of the vein and the flebotomist should be on the left.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in the case of a thin person, do the opposite of that, and have them extract it in small incisions, and make sure the wound is straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best thing to administer in vein incision is that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of flebotomy saves from flow of pus and from injury of nerves, and is more laudable and safer than second-hand flebotomy by length and width.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And when syncope occurs during flebotomy, and have them take that during the flebotomy a small amount of warm infusion of millet or simple oxide; and extract it from the vein in three or four incisions.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if the complexity increases, then take during the flebotomy a warm infusion of wormwood or wormwood infusion with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or aromatic wormwood infusion with an additional odorant.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If the tongue is swollen and causes difficulty in speaking, and its cause is a lack of moisture, then take some flesh water and add an essence of subtle odor; use aromatic oil, and rub it on the affected area.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of this chapter for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	To do this, you should apply the other methods that we have mentioned in the second chapter for the purpose of dissolving the swelling and removing the second layer of the tongue, which is caused by a lack of moisture, as its effect is to gradually remove the swelling, according to the amount of its effect in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	If you want to apply this method and remove the second layer of the tongue, and if your body is strong, then do this seven hours or nine in the morning after the first tongue extraction.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	If you want to move the swelling of the body in the opposite direction of the part that is affected, then it should be done on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When that body in which the pus is deep and sharp and causes fever, it should be drained in a vessel and a large amount of it should be drained and the opening should be amplified to prevent syncope, so that you have preserved all the conditions of abscess drainage; and that your hand should be placed on the thighs of the patient, to prevent them from dying of syncope, because undrained abscesses cause that when the abscess drainer is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not do when you want to lower your arm and evacuate the second vessel, since the orifices of the vein have already been closed and it is difficult to remove the pus, because you press against that vehemence and bend it unnaturally, for that is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the layssa inside when performing second drainage; or do not do that because the pus is coagulated in the orifices of the vein; or place on that tyriaca alfarach, or sagzenea, and press that against compression lightly until the pus is out and gone.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is inflamed, leave it alone until the abscess has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it is necessary to remove the pus again, and there is no excuse, then you should sign it in that place or in another vein on the other arm.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "funis del bras" is phlebotomized in the place of the femoral or popliteal veins, when they are not found or are hidden, which are composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient should place their hand in warm water until the vein swells and appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then strengthen it over that part with a narrow bandage; and perform phlebotomy transversely, not lengthwise or diagonally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make the incision wide and perform your phlebotomy on that part where you performed phlebotomy on the joint of the hand.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If it is forbidden to let the pus flow, then you should place your hand in warm water and let the pus run into the water until you achieve your purpose.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the days of summer, then you would be excused from the examination of the mouth in cold water, and the same is true for the body in cold water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The puncture of this vein is safer than all other veins, because it does not have a pulsating artery or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The puncture of the sole of the foot is comparable to the diseases of the leg.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of this puncture is that you strengthen the patient's leg or your own, rather than placing it in cold water, until the vein is inflamed and demonstrated at once; then perform a transverse puncture; and if you do not notice anything in return.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And remember that you do not leave the patient with the puncture, because it has the nerves of those exposed parts of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And repeat the patient in cold water and let the blood flow into that, because if you do not do so in cold water, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the bone is extracted according to the amount of necessity, then pause over the vein or salt and oil, so that it is not solidly consolidated; similarly cover what you do in every straight way.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The signs of the abdominal massage of that of the left breast are that they are compared to the illnesses of the womb.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same in the abdominal massage of it as you did in the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The sign of the vein in the abdominal massage is that it is compared to the illnesses that are in the part behind the chest, such as its illness of the main, and retention of menstruation, and illnesses of rashes and ulcers of thighs and legs, and their similarities to the illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the abdominal massage of it is that the patient enters their own hand in cold water and does over that friction until the veins appear; and tie over the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the location of the vein takes apparent from the said point, and from there its branches extend on the surface of the foot like ramps.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then, if possible, remove the widest vein or from under the cushion, place it on the foot, near the wound, which is best and most healing.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you remove the vein from the surface of the foot, then be careful not to touch the nerves that are under that on the surface of the foot, and pause your vein incision as if you wanted to insert it through.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And make it your own vein incision.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the discharge of pus is prohibited, then you should immerse the foot in warm water and let the pus run out through that opening which is to be drained.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the vein cutter makes a mistake in the first attempt, then repeat the vein incision on another spot, which is healing; and do not fear of causing harm, as long as you guard against the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, do the same for the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the sciatic vein, the spot as we have said is near the cavity of the wild animal's tail.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The pain in the joint of the leg when it is injured by a pointed instrument.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the joint injury is that the patient enters into a state of shock, and quickly and strongly presses the cushion of the leg from the side of the thigh up to the calf, forming a long, thin band, which does not appear otherwise.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore, when it appears, you should apply the bandage in a diagonal pattern across each finger, and this is better; or incise it at the beginning or remove it by sectioning, because the area of the leg is sore.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	This is especially true for men who are not accustomed to it; and if you apply it too much, and it does not appear at all, then bandage some part of the leg, and this is the one that appears on the back of the foot and around the ankle.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Be careful of the nerves, and apply the injury to the amount you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then remove the bandage and place your hand over the area of the bandage, pressing strongly on the injured area, as it is usually healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From the symptoms and the quality of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventozas are from corn, or from earth, or from vein.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventozas are made in two ways: one of them is the incision and extraction of blood, and the other is ventozas are incisions.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This incision that is made by incision is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the incisions that are made by incision and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body, one of which is where incisions are placed in the arm, and the last part is the back of the head; and the middle part is two parts of the neck; and incisions under the jaw, behind the mouth; and incisions of two spoons; and incisions of an auhoster, and it is on the tip of the coccyx; and incisions of two forks, and they are from two bones; and incisions of two cavities; and incisions of two cushions.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	When the pus is not extracted from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason the virtue is not obtained for those, as it is usually done by phlebotomy; nor does it cause any harm if the pus is not extracted by fire or by some bad condition caused by inflammation inside the body before all the body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If it is necessary to cause pus by illness or continuously, administer it throughout the entire hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of the hour and at some time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The reason for this is that in men, the pus multiplies inside them before it is necessary to extract it by puncturing and at their own head gravity and soda; and of those who have inflammation in their face and on their head, and in their neck; and of those who have pruritus in their face and on their forehead and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and of those whose location of the pus is changed; and of those who have multiplied blisters on their skin; and of those who have a taste of pus in their mouth, or their tongue is swollen and full of pus; and of those who have multiplied sleep, and of those who have pus in their sleep disturbance, nightmares, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it happens in some of those cases, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth toe, then we command that a blister be made after two or three hours have passed since the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the reason for the blister on the nape is that when it corresponds to gravity in the head and at that point where it is poured into the veins, but rather that this be close to the evacuation of all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this blister is in the location of the lumbar puncture of the cephalic.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not good to use that which is of fragile complexity, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that reason we do not recommend using those of the old ones, and in the heads of which there are illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But for that reason we recommend that the one who performs it be constantly present on it; and for that reason we advise you to command the blister maker that he place his hand a little away from the blister, so as to prevent the generation of oblivio.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	May the ventilation of alcohol be in place of fleubotomy of the femoral vein and vena cava: and for that, compare it with asthma, and with the constriction of the lungs and the wound of the stent of the lungs, and with cough, and with the inflation.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And cover that the ventilation of alcohol be in a small amount, because if it is paused behind, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the ventilation of alhagdahan compares to the accidental pains in the head and to obtalmia, and emigration, and pre-cavity, and to pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of fleubotomy of the vena cava.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And cover that commands the ventilator that he does not press his hand during scarification so that it does not pierce the artery and cause accidental bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And ventilation behind the mouth compares to alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar to those that are in the mouth, and it is in place of fleubotomy of the hemlock that is in the upper lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	When a bandage is applied to the two splints, it is used for retention of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the bandage of the two splints is used to apply pressure to the femoral vein, which is located in the thigh, and to the popliteal vein, and to the great saphenous vein, which are all superficial veins that are close to the skin, and to the small veins that are among the larger veins that reach the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the bandager not to proceed with incision, as the area is exposed to flesh, and then leave the nerves and arteries there.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And there is a bandage that is applied to the buttocks and used for the hemorrhoids of the anus and for the ulcers that are left.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And tell the bandager to use a large bandage, and that it is made of wool, as the area requires strong compression; and also remove the thin bandages that are under the incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	When the bedclothes are removed from under the patient's back, they pull the spine of the entire body, and alleviate old pains of the ribs and stomach, and of the bladder; and provoke menstruation, and alleviate constipation and diarrhea; and take the place of a fleam for bleeding two veins, and also for cupping, and of two leeches.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, it weakens the entire body and causes convulsions in men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the bedclothes cupping is applied to the same place as the bedclothes of two cushions.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the bedclothes is that they are placed at the beginning of the view and are warmed by heat, and do not prolong the position of the bedclothes, but pause them a little, and remain them constantly, and that the humors come to the place for the occurrence equally.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already red and swollen, and that the pain of the spine appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you should shave and repeatedly incise the skin in small portions, and then consider the position of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that man who is of thin flesh and prone to ulcers, you should shave and apply a plaster, but not cover the wound completely, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the blower to fan the incision and apply a small amount, and simultaneously facilitate the skin.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the skin is thickened, then shave twice, because in the first incision, the path of subtilization to the skin and its moisture is found.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second incision, the process of extraction of thick skin is obtained.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the skin is very dirty, then make a thorough incision in the third incision to obtain its rear.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the skin in small portions or a small amount, provide us with an incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a large amount of skin, make a large incision; and if we know that the skin is thick, then shave it with a prior incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term for incision in which the depth of the wound is only to the extent of the knife.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the one from whom the wound is thick, hard, black, and its pores are straight, then apply oils that make the locations of the bowels more lenient, open, and resolved; if it is in the summer, use olive oil of aloe or olive oil of violat, or olive oil of amelliorated donkey, or olive oil of cement of goat; and if it is in the winter, then use oils such as narcissus, lily, camomilla, or sandalwood.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick, rough, then apply the oil of amber, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloe, or oil of anethi, and similar oils.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the intestine is of large pores of tender flesh, then it is prohibited to use oil, and instead apply water that has been boiled or boiled with salt, or water of goat, or water of borax, and similar waters.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for those who have much moisture in their joints, wash their feet with warm water or a mixture of vinegar, salt, and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those who have thick excess, wash their feet with warm water or a mixture of sage, mint, or camomile and similar substances.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And the foot should be kept dry afterwards; having taken care that it is administered close to the fire for an hour or two, and that it sleeps close to the foot.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done before washing the feet is that they are leeched or bled.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	If the person who is to be leeched or bled is feverish and has inflammation in the joints, then take cooling causes such as vinegar, salt, warm water, laytugus, secanabin, and julep, and similar substances.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And place them on their food such as bread, meat of partridges, and cooked vegetables seasoned with warm water, and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And of that one whose complexion is freckled, he takes in the morning essence of almonds, or essence of saffron, and sumac, and some fragrant meat between old and new; and it is recommended that he use little milk and food, and pause the meals of him, fish, canary, pigeons, small birds, and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is recommended that on the day of windy and rainy weather, the milk should be greater than the meal.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is recommended that some milk be given to some men in the morning with Tyrian alpharac, or with medicaments of musk, ground musk, or alcelita against windy weather or rainy weather, so that the main members are comforted and that the sick is subtilized; and it is not recommended that they take that scalfatz.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	The incisions that are made with their scarification should be incisions that are paused over the fetus, and above the womb and gout, and above the umbilicus, in the places of the joints, and the pedicle of the wide one, because these members do not suffer incision over them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	It is not sought for those but rather attraction of blood from the member, such as with a ventous pad over the breast in illness of flux of blood from the member of the nose; and use of that to dissolve the ventosity freely around the member, such as with a pad on the belly and umbilic; for that rarefies the member and removes it and relieves the pain that resolves the ventosity.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is placed on the bones when they are injured or broken, for by the power of attraction strong blood heals the injury and eradicates the pain from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, when it is placed on the leg and the ankle, it removes the ventosity in those who are swollen.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these ventosities are administered by views with success only; and some are administered by heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered full of cold water in the illnesses of the ankle.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is why the ventosity is full and large, so it is cold water alone or water in which herbs have been boiled that are suitable for it.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The method of administering a ventricle of two fingers: the width of the orifice should be twice the size we have formed; and the quantity of the potion should be the thickness of one palm; and it should be on the left side of the body, in the location where it is in the circuit, the largest part of the body, the trauma should be small according to the quantity that enters into it like a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of lamb's wool or citrus, with large margins, lion, equal and tense so that it does not leave the member in its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it should be at the midpoint of the vertebral column or iron, where the candle is placed to hold the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this ventricle should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and the potion should be less than that according to the diseases and the state of the one who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the ventricle of children and the old should be different from the ventricle of young people and large bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of applying this ventricle with fire over the member is that it extends the muscle with fire decently by placing a small candle of wax, and place it on the midpoint of the vertebral column in the middle of the ventricle, so that the fire is ignited around the part that is not burned the body of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And place your hand on the patient's body, and the other on the area we have mentioned, until when they are holding their breath and do not need to open the mouth and let the steam over that area, then the breath will be dissolved soon.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And apply the second medicine according to your method, and repeat that if necessary for that area.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In the breathing medicine that is administered in the patient's disease of plague, which does not have any transverse or longitudinal lines, and is not administered except that it be filled with water, and is placed on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this breathing, the more it is large, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in any member except in the members in which it is impossible to position ventosas, such as the gums and similar parts; or in a naked member of flesh, such as the nose and similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodsucking insects that are in the dirty waters of polluted rivers.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then, after letting them drink water from the dirty waters where they were famished, and there was no cause in their belly of those; and then, let the body be emptied at the beginning with a flebotomy and ventozas; and then, apply the patient's member under which it becomes red; and then, place them on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to apply the place with a ventosa, it is better in the future.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the place with warm water and apply cold water; and then, apply and express it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body of the sick is prolonged, then let them lie in the bed of bloodsucking insects, and that water is residue, then you put a cloth of freezing water into it, and place that above where the residue is hidden.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the swelling is multiplied, then powder it with three-grained vitriol, or with similar substances like stiptics, until the swelling is lanced; or place the most dried beans on the affected area, and leave them until the beans stick to the area, and then lance the swelling.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, perform bloodletting repeatedly, when possible, changing those veins.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is prohibited from the affected area, then apply pressure to the swollen area with a recent wound or insert a needle into the area until the swelling subsides; and then place them, so that those areas that are still slightly swollen are immediately bandaged.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want to remove them, powder the affected areas with a small amount of three-grained aloe, salt, or ashes, and then quickly remove them.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Here begins the prolegomena of the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental displacement of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, child, be wise and know that many foolish doctors and common people, as well as those who at some time will not follow the books of the Ancients or read one letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the sciences on our earth is hidden; and I have not done so at some time, but rather because of the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science of those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then direct oneself to experiment and study throughout the length of one's life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that concerns the greatest science and on which I have made my best experiment; therefore, I open it to you others and deliver it from this occupation of length; and I open it at the end of opening; and I show it at the end of declaration; and I form it into several forms of the instruments that are administered in that, as is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections on the breaking of bones, from those that are necessary to mention before we begin the memory of broken and different limbs of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Let us then say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters according to the understanding of which in the beginning it is possible for craftsmen and a station upon the truth of those; so is you and those who know or learn this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore say that when something happens to any fracture or dislocation or torsion or cast, it is necessary to begin with the lancet or cutting of that, or whichever, if no cause prevents, as is due to weakening of virtue, or that which happened, or is old in decrepitat, or is time of great heat, or of great cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with eating such foods of fresh herbs and of the flesh of young birds and of crabs; and prohibit coarse meats and filling with foods and all food that fills the veins of sanc, before you are sure of apostema caut, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their first usual state.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the bone begins to be restored, then feed the patient with nutritious foods that are heavy and heavy in nature, such as their food made of wheat flour, water, rice, peas, and meat of cows, and hooves, and fresh pee, and large and similar ones, and this diet is made by coagulation of fracture more lightly and milk.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you know that when the bones are broken in men who are in their first youth and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are continued and consolidated according to their nature for a long time by the drying of those members, and those that are of them at the end of leniency, such as the bones of small animals.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and annects to the broken bone from all parts of a similar cause in which it is swollen and strengthened that enters and consolidates and binds together, until venom comes from strength and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, until any cause does not prevent that of its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason, it is necessary to place the patient's legs in a position where they have heaviness, viscosity, and heaviness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	There is great variety of fracture according to the type of limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the types of fracture vary according to the type of limb, for example, a fracture of the rib is different from a fracture of the skull; and similarly, a fracture of the rib is different from a fracture of the arm; and likewise, all other limbs are different from each other.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will recall the memory of each type of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	There is great variety of fracture in the body itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The types of bone fractures are diverse in their own ways; for example, some are caused by bending, others by the length of the bone: and some fractures are due to the shoulder blade, ribs, and adductors, and others are not, as is the case when preparing to write, and the fracture is in the back and disruption in the skull, and the small fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And in all cases, a particular torture is used for the recovery of the second after it has been remembered in its different locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Great swelling of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for that, it is known as bone fracture: the swelling of it, and the presence of a prominent eminence and sensitivity at the touch, and its location when you place your hand on it.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no swelling in the location or no sensitivity, it is not necessary to touch the bone with your fingers when you touch the patient's movement and they do not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	However, it is possible that there may be swelling or small fissures, without you being able to feel them with your hand and compression of all; however, place something over it of the medicines of which you remember at that moment, which is appropriate for the location; and keep it straight by a subtle restriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you will know that the location when it is curved and not divided into two or another, as it remains the entire part of the comparison, then place something over it from your hour to the rectification of it, which happens after postema caution.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If an abscess occurs at that location, leave it open for several days until the abscess ceases; then apply a poultice of equal parts of linseed and egg yolk that you can make with levitation and engine.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	You should know that the healing of the abscess and its puncture are more dangerous than the bone in which the suppuration occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then apply strength to the second one when it comes to remembering it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the bone is affected, it is necessary to extend this member by cutting it from two parts, whether the thigh or the foot; or if your hand is small, use two cords or a cord and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place your hand at the position where you place it while the member is being extended, and puncture those additions with an engine and according to each method that you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard yourself according to your strength that it does not occur on the patient due to your operation or the injury; and puncture yourself according to your power that you apply the bone to another as a companion according to the best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And if you touch your hand at that time appropriately and see any other cause here, correct it and equalize it by the amount of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And if you excessively extend and compress it, as foolish doctors often do, it can cause the formation of an abscess by their operation, or it can cause contraction in the member, as we have seen in their foolish operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And if you appropriately attach, equalize and perform proper operation and structure of that member, and restore peace; remind the patient about this and make him understand that he should not move that member during his watch and sleep, and observe its rotation and agitation, and direct its excretion, and direct all its movements to maintain its health; and wait until the position of the member is in a position that does not cause pain, which is the cause why when it is in the position of the member, it causes pain; therefore covertly change that position to another position that does not cause pain; and guard that the position of that member is straight and equal, so that the member does not suffer torture when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the fracture of the limb depends on which one I recommend; because you know that broken limbs vary in their location, size, and form according to the type.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small like the arm and the elbow and similar to these, it is customary to cover them with a very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are large like the thigh or the chest, it is customary to cover them with a soft and durable cloth, because the flexibility of the fabric connects the large limb strongly and evenly to the fracture in all parts without any macula.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then, after that, your evacuation of the wound, place a suitable bandage over that fracture, with three or four layers as soon as the limb becomes clean; and strengthen your hand on the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then go to the most distant part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen it as much as possible so that your bandage does not slip from the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then, using a bandage, approach the area around the fracture and gradually soften the structure until you feel a large piece break off.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then, using another bandage, wrap it around the other side of the injury over the first bandage, and gradually approach the bandages to the part beyond the fracture; and your operation should be on the structure of the bandage and the softening of the second one that we mentioned in the first bandage.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place a cushion or cloth between the bandages that is equal to the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is tortuosity in it; and if not, do not place anything on it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place a cushion on the other bandage, and gradually place these pointed bandages decently soon, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area; and then place the cushion over that which secretes the abscess and which has the inflammation; and leave it for several days; and then strengthen on those points.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And if the cannula of the needle is made of iron, and well formed; or of steel; or of palm branches; and let the width of each needle be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the star that is placed over that fracture should be thicker and longer than the others, and the length of the needle should be according to the size and proportions of the member; and strengthen the other end with another bend according to your first structure; and apply the thread below as we have said of the structure, and it is that your structure should be according to the location of the fracture, and the longer it is from the fracture, the looser the structure.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And that the threads should be thick and thin, and made of silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of pulling out the hair of folded threads of cord of silk, and it is a great error when the structure is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And using very thin needles is not convenient, because you will not be able to sew those things that you want, and you do not want there to be any space between them.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is sewn at the extremities of the ribs near the incision, then place a cloth or carmenada wool over that area so that it does not cause harm to them.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are caused by trauma, and some are due to disruption in the chain, and you will find memory in that one in the second chapter of singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that not all broken bones are sewn up on the first day; the reason for this is that the bone, when it is large, does not want to be placed over the ribs sooner than five days or seven or more, according to your security of the occurrence of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of the plasters that the Ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and torsions.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Translation: A plaster made like a cast for the restoration of fractures, suitable for various complexities and especially for women and children, where it is not recommended to have heat or moisture: take powder from ground flour, and it is the medulla of the farina that should be mixed with the movement of the mold in the walls of the mold.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	Translation: And if it is like that, but you crimp this alum of wool, and place the comfort of the non-sharp or subtle; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Translation: Another plaster for the restoration of fractures and dislocations and torsion: recipe of asafetida, of lotus, of acacia, of enula, and migrach, which is made from a thousand grains of salt, of all ana drac. x; of myrrh and aloe ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; all their trissatz and cribbled and mixed with water or wool if the complexity of the patient is scalded; and then use this plaster, which is of good composition and restores the broken bones more effectively, and confers to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of applying a splint that is suitable for fractures and twists: Take equal parts of marshmallow root, mallows root, acacia root, and Armenian bole, in the ratio of 6:3:1:20.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Grind all the ingredients in a large mortar with contrition, and their sieves, and their powders with water or egg white, and administer it.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of applying a splint to joints and separated bones from those places, and for painful accidents in those areas and fissures and fractures: Take some cotton and soak it in a mixture of equal parts of vinegar and oil, and place it on the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This ointment does not have the virtue of healing, but it is useful for preventing abscesses and expelling pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of applying a splint that heals broken bones: Take some willow leaves and wild poppy leaves, grind them all together and make an ointment from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of applying a poultice administered for the healing of fractured bones and when you want to resolve the recent inflammation of an abscess: Take some marshmallow root, camomile, and violet flowers, flour of eggs, all ground together and mixed with water, if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalded, then apply that wet cloth of cold or warm water and use it from it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plaster that is stronger in resolution than this first one, when dealing with a long-lasting abscess: take the roots of althea and semens of lily, balm, melissa, majorana, flowers of violet, camomile, all parts equal; all should be ground and mixed with soft water or warm water or honey, according to the quality of the limb and the color of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Ypocras not be dissolved in its own free state that it be placed on the limb that is injured, but a cerate made of wax and oil should be used; and recommend that it be applied between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Gualia be seen that it is placed on the limb that is injured and for the causes in which exsiccation is used to reduce heat, such as ice, ice packs, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Remedy for applying to injury and pain: take equal parts of ground human bones or animal skull, salt, and honey; grind them with a mortar and pestle, and make an ointment.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	If the amount depends on the type of wound that was injured and how it should be dressed, consider whether it does not cause pain or swelling, and if the bones are not broken, do not leave it undressed for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If the wound causes severe pain, swelling, or inflammation, then change it in that hour, and apply the ointment to the wound.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a cloth and sea sponge lion, wet it with cold water, and soak the wound in that water until the swelling and pain subside; then rest the limb for an hour; then place a warm, oily, or rose-scented cloth over the wound, and leave it on for a night until you are sure of the abscess, and that the inflammation of the limb has subsided, and the pain of the wound has been relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then gently apply that thin structure and apply a small plaster, but do not strain it too much by your initial constraint, and gradually heal that which is inside.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and swelling and pain and inflammation and all other symptoms have already subsided from everything, and if you need plaster and constraint, then apply it equally as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no harm has occurred to the member of those that we have mentioned, then do not remove it, but wait three days or four or five or six; and sometimes all of this is left for twenty days after you have appeared by the removal of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and settles on the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust in the constraint more than in your initial constraint, and adjust in the swelling of the food of the patient, according to what preceded the recall of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you see that the location of the fracture has already dried up and become more tired than usual, then know that the nourishment cannot reach that place; therefore, rub that area with a thin, warm, oily substance throughout the day, and do this for three days; and after this operation, the nourishment will reach the member, and it will be healed.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	If that which the foolish restorers of the fractured limb do not restore to its original state when it is not healed, according to their method, and if they restore it according to its tortuosity, it is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if that were done correctly, it would enlarge the ancient ones in their freedoms and aggravate that which they have done.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do that, so it is reasonable that they should not do that.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter two: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are distinct, because some fractures are caused by percussion of space, and the percussion goes through the entire bone, which is then the bone, just as it does in the staff, and for that reason this type is called ascial; or the space enters a part of the bone, and enters the flesh of it and does not pass the entrance to the back of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the pain of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contraction or attrition; and the cause of it is percussion by a sharp object or impact on stone, and similarly.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is so deep that it approaches the periosteum which is on the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the pain of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of fracture is that it occurs in the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and for that reason this special fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this fracture is made by impact or percussion of stone, and similarly, which causes some fragment of the bone to break into pieces, and it is made in the concave place as happens to the ribs when they are struck and broken into pieces, and their fragments enter into the parts inside.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is more commonly made in the bodies of human beings, such as their ribs.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these special fractures are marked by pain that is similar to that of stab wounds.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you should examine everything in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you should recognize all these special fractures by detection of those and by investigation of their causes and the corruption of flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And a special type of fracture is recognized by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and it is cleaned, and it is applied to the wound, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider the patient's symptoms at the beginning, and if you see by the symptoms that manifest themselves clearly on account of the pain, such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of understanding, abscess of wounds, fever, and sweating of those, and similar to those of the symptoms in the major dispositions, these are not cured.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see symptoms that do not correspond to the pain, then you hope for healing, and then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	When this cause occurs, if it comes to your hand in the beginning as it is placed and that is in the days of winter, then you should study in the position of the bone giving on the fourteenth day, completely prepared.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then you should study in the position of the bone giving on the seventh day, having that which is left after the bone is corrupted by the pancreas, and that accidents have occurred.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the pancreas covering the brain, and it is small and atrophied, then you should study in the position of the cut and atrophied part, according to what I will recommend to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you raise the head of the patient placed on the bone, and discover according to custom and your possible skill according to the figure of the wound, and that it is lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if an accident occurs to you in the detection of the bone, flow of pus or abscess cauterized, then you should stop at the patient and that which is left, and that you fill the place with cloths infused in wine and oiled, and make a second dressing of the wound before the abscess is sedated, and be sure of flowing pus; and then begin in the circumference of the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The first method is that you insert the bone with a straight incisor tool, and this is the form of it: And then administer another incisor tool, slightly wider than the first one; and this is the form of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer the wider incisor tool.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should have various incisor tools, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are at the end of their sharpness, and they are made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion on the incisor to avoid damaging the head and causing that.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should drill around it to allow you to use incisor tools called non-deepening taravals.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And these are not called anything else but that they do not penetrate the end of the bone at that point, so that the taravel has a rounded tip or margin on that which is left of the cap similar to the edge or a small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the density of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is advisable to take many of these needles that are suitable for each bone, as long and as short as the length and breadth of the corresponding needle.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three types of needles: The quality of perforating around the bone broken is that you place the needle on the bone and rotate it against the skin until you know that the bone has penetrated; then move the needle to another location, and pause where there is a quantity of flesh or around that area.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert the fine scissors that are between each fracture of the bone, and do as much as possible on that area, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for the purpose of removing the fragments that have appeared at that area, as with fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be careful not to touch any cause of the sinus with the scissors.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so, when you have circled the bone perforation, and if it is continued with the same instrument, and then extracted, cut it like a scalpel, similar to an incisor, but rather more sharp and more delicate than other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there is any small piece of bone remaining, take that tool that you should have from the instruments; and apply it to the wound to remove the remaining pieces.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is long and difficult, which was said by Guy de Chauliac and Laurence; and this is the saying about it: it is necessary for you to begin by discovering the part of the bone in which the fracture is most violent and most manifest, before you have discovered that part and placed the end of this slow and light scalpel, which is its form.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lens-shaped part is sharp and does not incise any cause, and the sharp part is in two parts in front in length, as often; that the lens-shaped part should be adjusted to the bone by the face of the sharp part incising into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Approach with a small, sharp knife and make an incision in the skin, and you should be careful not to cut any vessels that could cause an accident during the procedure, and if the physician was the most skilled of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly,
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if there is any cause for annexation to the vessels of the skin in those places where the incision is made, make an incision at the end of the knife in that circular shape, and release that from the vessel, which is released from its harm and its fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the skin, and that which is cut or remains on the bone is the surface of the bone, and it is rough and subtle, then cover that roughness and remove those subtleties with razor blades prepared for that purpose, in various quantities so that you can administer them in all places as conveniently as possible, and the most suitable one in that place where you lost your operation that bone broken and the figure of the bone.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And when you administer the first dose of medicine in your ratio, which you use to thin the bones at the beginning, and then use it close to the most subtle part of it, and do not cease to do so until you reach administering the thinnest and most subtle part of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In each of the other small fractures and subtle fracture, administer treatment according to what you have lost for its rectification.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is not caused by all those that have been studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And it is based on what we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the skin is torn when you remove the bone, then you should take cloth of the second quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another cloth doubled or tripled and submerge it in vinegar and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth, and do this as gently as possible without causing pain; and then administer a thin layer of latex, and do not press it except for the quantity that the wound has, only to keep it in place.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that one to this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess caut; and then remove it and then administer medicines that are excessively dry, such as linseed and flour of eggs, and powder of ashes and aristolochia, and similar things to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make these medicines into powder that is ground over the wound, such as they are dry; and generally, administer all of this medicine of property of which is that it removes and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard yourself second that the wound in your cure is not net; and it is not in the deafness of tongue or other; nor does it allow to aggravate in it; because when it is adjusted over the membrane of the brain, corrode that and poreys that, and happen upon the patient that malicious evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And happen upon the top of the head, as from there the bone is formed and more when it is deeply treated with that, and it becomes black on the surface of it; and therefore consider now if it happens to the patient those accidents that we have said, know that it is dangerous for all.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If there is no other illness except for the one that is placed above, and it is due to the effectiveness of that medicine that cures that illness, then cover that part with a piece of honey and four pieces of roasted garlic, and place a cloth over it; and then place it on the affected area and apply the appropriate treatment for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You should know that the nose is not broken into two pieces equally, but rather one of those parts is more rounded, or some of those parts have bones, while the other part is cartilaginous and does not break, only its shape, twist, and width change.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of the nose is broken, then cover it with a small piece of the same nose, and align that fracture with the other side, until it returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And this should be done by you for your own convenience, and beware that you do not cause harm to the patient during your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and it does not permit to see through it, then cover it with a small patch.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the same thing.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And if you can restore the patient on the first day after the fracture, do so; otherwise, then bring the seventh or tenth day to pause the dressing of the abscess.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And if the fracture is in one part, then insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, or if it is in two parts, then place two pieces of cotton, and make sure they fill up the entire opening of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And tell the ancient healers that the cotton should be wrapped in a border, and moved around all day, but not seen by me; having covered the piece with alum mixed with powdered molasses, and then leave it until the bone is stopped and the cartilage is strengthened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some bandages should be inserted into the nose, in place of a gag, unless it is wrapped in a cloth from the lion; and if you have already broken the fracture of the nose, more violently than the patient is prohibited from inspiring.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, make gags.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another bandage causes an abscess, apply the nose with a cerate or a poultice made of bread and honey, or with diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	However, if no abscess is caused, then cover that deformed part with flour of sizami and powder of chalk mixed with egg white; and place a cloth from the lion on it, and do not let the nose touch anything.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	However, if the bones of the nose are fractured or crushed, then cover those with it, and extract those with instruments that are appropriate for them; and place this laceration, and heal that with what encases and consolidates, and with ointments that are suitable for it.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If there is a bleeding nose, then apply pressure to stop it and insert a tube into the nostril to prevent further blood loss.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is broken and the fracture does not cause pain, look to see if the fracture is only slightly deformed and not completely broken into two pieces, but curved to the parts inside, then it is likely that it will heal on its own.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is in the middle of the jaw, then introduce your finger from the left side into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, then introduce your finger from the right side into the patient's mouth; and push against that softness of the fracture to facilitate the deformed parts, with your other hand on the opposite side of the bone; and hold it in place.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is already separated into two pieces, then apply traction to both parts in a straight line as much as possible to realign it.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a disruption of teeth to the point of breaking, then use those materials that you hope will remain intact, such as gold or silver or cedar; and place them over the broken jaw, and place them over the doubled-up cloth, and place a large, properly made pad, or a single weight equal to the length of the jaw; and hang it above the second that you have prepared for the application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be at ease, and place a lion's tongue decoction on their wounds.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then wait and remove it on the third day; and correct what has been altered from it and apply that mixed with powder of moli, album of egg, or flour of chickpeas, so that you have already removed the cement from it, and place a lion's skin over the application.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, with this annex and adjusted, apply the ointment to it, and if the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it until it is healed and strong; for this fracture is usually healed in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another complication occurs, such as an abscess, then administer the same remedies we have mentioned for fever during the patient's recovery, and that abscess will also heal.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is severe, consider whether the bone has been separated or not, then carefully apply the appropriate remedy for removing those fragments from the wound.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the openings of the wound are narrow, then enlarge them using a probe according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have removed those fragments and they do not remain, then enlarge the wound openings if necessary; otherwise, place one of the appropriate remedies on the wound and cover it until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the scapula when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The scapula is broken at the part where it meets the shoulder blade, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts other than the shoulder joints; and it is more difficult to restore; or it is such that it has happened in the shoulder joints, and it is difficult to restore; or it is such that the fracture is in the arm.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is in the arm, is to have two assistants, so that one holds the injured arm and follows the broken furcula, and the other extends the neck to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then align the fracture with the bones in front of it as it is made in the second form of the curve, and not in the prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if more extension is needed, then cover it with a cloth or wool from the patient's head above, and make its size according to your need; and extend and elevate the furcula and bind the cloth in your hand inside, so that the fracture is aligned as it should be.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot pull the tip of the sternum to the fractured parts, so that it reaches the prone, then place the patient on their back, and place a large cushion over their chest muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant massages the chest muscle to the fractured parts before the bone of the sternum is raised to its position in the prone, and then you correct the fracture and equal it with those called ribs.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	However, if you feel any sharp pain from the sternum and its surrounding area, then do so over that and remove those sharp pains for ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is held in the bone, then use one of the scissors that you have prepared for this, since you have placed the forceps under the sternum; and this forceps is made of iron:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And its shape is similar to a hook, and its width is according to what you need from it, depending on the size of the bone or its fragility.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	May the length of it be second to what is possible for the operation; there should be two extremities with times, and one extremity should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the bone's tag is wide, and it is safe from pus, then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is narrow, or you fear pus, then fill the wound with bandages and powders according to the amount of the wound's incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if pus does occur, then pour in a cloth with warm water and rose oil, and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the structure of the bone when it is wounded and cut be that you place a poultice made of flour of mold and album of honey on it, and place it over the shoulder of the lion, and place your hand over the back of the wound, if necessary, and take humidify, which is twisted by the Saracens, that should be long enough, and its width should be one palm or about that; and place powdered duplicates on the poultice and the bandage; and place a thin tablecloth of the width of three fingers and lengthwise similarly; and wrap that in cloth, and place that cloth with the tablecloth over the location of the fracture; and take humidify as it revolves, and revolve it on the neck of the patient and behind the ear of the patient, and reduce it over all parts, and when the structure of the fracture is structured downwards, and that is what should not be hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And even if the bone above the broken leg is not displaced; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the bandage is softened or you remove the splint, then you should straighten it again and strengthen the ligament.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's pillow on their shoulder, and place another pillow under their arm to support the patient's arm in the new position; so that the helper can raise the patient's arm from the side of the other, and thus elevate the fracture of the clavicle at the elevation of the muscle; or the arm of the patient is placed on the shoulder of the other.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage unless an abscess occurs in the wound within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen the surface of the wound at that point, and adjust it to the structure and restore it until it is restored and the fracture of the clavicle has coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some exercises are done in certain people at that time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A splint is broken in the affected area and not the fracture itself, but the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the affected area is broken - and it is broken in the middle of the affected area - and it is not known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare for the treatment of it and reduce it according to its natural form in any way possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And place your hand over the area with powdered egg white and lemon juice; and place a folded cloth on it; and place a thin sheet of tablecloth according to the amount of the splint or more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the sheet is concave in any part of the splint, then level that concavity with lemon juice, and place the sheet according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And place a bandage over it with prolonged humidity and by the construction of a decent and firm hold of the sheet until it is not released from its own place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament in each day; and all the time it is softened, apply another bandage and strengthen it and make it even if it remains in its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the patient on their left side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spoon is restored in 10 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and you know that it is from the bones of which the beginning was not feared or their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if the wound occurs in the bone of the foot and place it under the skin, then you cut it on it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio of abscess caut if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The chest is broken in some places of it and that ends up; but the extremities of it are somewhat attached and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And when the patient's leg is broken, it bends at the fracture parts and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, and cough, and much sweat and vomiting; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of the broken bone is that the patient is placed on their back, and a cushion is placed between their shoulder blades; then press the muscles of the bone, and adjust the ribs of the bone to two vertical positions, and gradually perform the operation of the bone and its alignment according to all possible and appropriate methods until it returns to its original shape.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place a poultice and bandage over the broken bone on a thin layer of salt or honey and similar substances on top of it, so that you can wrap it in cloth; then gradually apply the poultice to the fracture so that it is not too tight; and when the wound has softened, strengthen it with a proper bandage. Also consider the wound throughout the entire hour, and when it is softened, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if the need arises to remove that part of the body that is affected by the disease or inflammation, pain, or abscess that has occurred in that area, then you should cut and remove that part and eradicate the plaster and correct what has happened due to that hand's healing method; and then return the plaster, if necessary, and adjust it within the structure until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You should know that the fracture of the ribs does not occur except in the broader parts where they are divided; and from the extremities of those parts, nothing happens to them except due to that which is cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And you should not be blinded by the feeling of it, but rather make an inquiry about it and the mentioned ones.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be as equal to the fracture as possible, within the structure, until it is covered and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with that one, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the rib fracture is directed towards the internal organs, the patient experiences severe pain and puncture, similar to the puncture experienced by those who have cried out, and for this reason the bones are covered with a bandage; and they experience difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting, which is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ancients used this method with great success.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they said: cover the patient's abdomen with a cloth to generate inflation and ventilation, so that the abdomen is filled and extended, and the fracture is pushed away from the internal organs.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We do not use this method to avoid causing an abscess, unless it occurs; and if it does occur, we now help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they said to them that it should be placed above the wound and squeezed with great force; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the wound will attract excess fluid to the area due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they say to the patient: cover that place with a wool that has already been submerged in hot cauterizing oil, and place powders between the ribs until it is filled, which should be the same amount as when you wrap the second time; and then cure the patient with the care of pleurisy from food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient experiences severe constraint that they have not suffered before, and the bones puncture the bandage, then cover the patient with a blanket, revealing the broken rib, and place your hand over that instrument that contains the cipher, the memory of which is preceded, and cut the bone to facilitate its removal.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the loose lips of the wound, if it is large, with a bandage, and cure that with ointments until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs, then you cover it and insert powders in hot rose oil and place your hand over the area, and cure the patient with that which covers the abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him lie on his left side while he is recovering.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of the fracture of the sacrum of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and are similar to those in the sacrum of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when such an accident occurs to anyone and you want to know if it will heal or not, consider the following: if the bones are already softened and numb and dead and cannot move or strengthen those, and when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and feel no pain in them, then you know that it is not healing, and in such cases the prognosis is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you feel pain in them when pressed or pricked, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the same thing in the sacrum of the neck and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet of that person.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you see that it has already become softened, if those things happen in the muscles, and when it is on its back, it becomes paralyzed and cannot urinate, and some people lie on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and therefore do not treat it.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If none of those things happen, the cause is better and less dangerous.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment of it is to prick the abscess with a needle that you place on the spine, or with a thorn dipped in honey or garlic; place some of those on the abscess to help sedation.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the plasters that provide comfort and relief, and strengthen it with a bandage; command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where the pain occurs until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if there is an infection of the bone or some cause that has already been separated from it, then cover it with a bandage and splint that bone; and then adjust the wounds of the plague, with stitches if it is large; and then care for that with some flesh of the meat, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the back of the thigh bone is broken, and it is at the end of the spine, then you should insert your left hand into the anus, and equalize the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible; and if necessary, apply pressure and splinting, and then strengthen that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel broken ribs in the chest, then cover that area, and hold it, and treat the wound with the cure that is preceded by healing until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the restoration of the ankle.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the ankles are broken, and if they are broken, the fracture of them is only communication in the extremities of those and they are inserted in the length and decline to the parts intended; and the patient experiences pain at the location and puncture, and the blanket is shocked when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that which is above the fracture, which is the figure of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the end of it, then you should equalize it with the second one that you have prepared for equality, entering as much as necessary until it is restored to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the long bone or that already declines to the parts below, then you should make the patient lie on their back until they are prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have equalized that one, place your hand on the plaster, and place another hand on that star of wood or of coda, and strengthen for stricture over the one you do not fear puncture of fracture or removal of the star.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And equalize the concavity of that which places that one inside of which that one takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if abscess occurs, then you should cease from extension of it and its restoration until that which is sedated the abscess, and place your hand on that one which precedes that; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen that which has cover.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if there are fractures or dislocations in the bones, then treat them accordingly.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the humerus.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The humerus is that which is between the ribs and the shoulder joint.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you hold it with your hand in this manner:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	and if it is attached to two ends of bands, then suspend it from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on a chair; and when you reach the broken arm over the thigh, it should reach the elbow of the same place where the curvature of the bone is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend something heavy over that, or the nurse extends it to the parts below; and the doctor should put the fracture back together again as soon as possible until the fracture returns to its place.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other assistant should make sure that the patient is lying on their back and holding their head with their hand; and then command two assistants to hold what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other should hold the broken part of the body; and each of them should extend their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then press on the fracture with your hand and on the other hand with the other hand, and each of the two assistants should extend their parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then place half of the cloth on the side of the body and the other behind the fracture to protect it.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the body, then place the cloth on that spot and on that part.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Equalize it with that and its work, and when it is equaled according to what is covered and applied properly, then press on that if it does not cause an abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If an abscess occurs, leave the stricture in place until the seventh day, and place a wet bandage on the sore in advance of the wound, and apply rose oil until it is ready to be reopened, and then strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of strengthening it is to place a plaster on the fracture, and then cover it with a clean cloth; and then adjust the arm on the assistant, and place your hand on the affected muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And then cover the cloth and strengthen the arm on the assistant's shoulder to prevent the arm from being in a sling, if there is no cause for the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use slings.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And then place a sling over the fracture that is higher and stronger than the others; and between each sling, let the length of the sling be according to the fracture, added by three digits of the whole part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen the slings with the stricture that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And your structure over the area of the fracture should be straighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And as the fracture becomes more curved, the structure becomes smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you see the position of the ribs and the structure as we have said in the time when you restore the member to its original position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear infection, then leave the structure and ribs inside as we have said on day seven.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days to prevent it from occurring in the wrong place or inflammation; or it is prohibited for food to arrive at the member due to the arrangement of excessive structure; and therefore correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are unsure about any cause of this, then do not remove the bandage for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And the patient's head should be on their back, and their hands should be over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place your hand on the assistant's full of wool equally, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not separated or dissolved, or that the bandage is softened, therefore correct everything according to your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Pause the food of the patient according to the order we have given, unless the food is delicate at the beginning until it is digested; and afterwards cover that food with a cloth.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	It is customary for the assistant and the nurse of the patient to be strong for ten days; and afterwards cover that food with a cloth and bathe it and medicate it with the remedies that correct that one.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is not healed after one or two months, then you should not remove that bandage and those splints.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called two knuckles; one is small and is the one that is closest to the wrist, and the other is large and is the one that is placed behind the small one from the wrist.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the larger or smaller knuckle is broken alone, or both are broken at once, it is very painful.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small intestine is cut above, its repair is more difficult, and its healing is even more difficult.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the large intestine below the fracture of the patient is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And it is even worse when two bones are broken.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small intestine above, it is advisable for the doctor to facilitate its repair by gently extending it.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large intestine is that which is broken, then one should apply more forceful extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both intestines are broken, then one should apply the most forceful extension.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And one should apply the figure of the hand to the repair and extension of the intestine over a cushion, and place the patient's hand above, and the ear should be lower than the others, and the patient should be lying on a pillow.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion underneath their head or arm, to prevent the patient from moving.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then approach the assistant and extend their arm on the side away from their body or arm, and another assistant should do the same on the other side.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And approach the doctor to set the bone as best as possible according to its figure.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are nails in the bone fracture, then drill through them all to remove them from their place according to your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if the nail appears to be separate and not according to your hope for its restoration, then do as we mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is in a difficult place, and you have already treated that chapter, then take care of that cure.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then you should apply a cloth made of olive oil and white wax, and be careful not to press too hard or too lightly, and strengthen the cloth over that thin structure until the abscess gives way; and then remove the cloth and apply a prepared paste of powdered myrrh and honey, and place a strong bandage over that fracture.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you know that the number of ribs in the arm is always in the major positions, or if there is a fracture in one or two places.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then place your bandage on the location of the fracture as tightly and forcefully as possible, and when more strength is needed to apply the bandage above or below the fracture, place it more gently than previously mentioned in the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and not hard or sharp, and the best one is the one that is strong enough to move between subtle and rough, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and the limb close to the fracture.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there is any cause for which correction is necessary, such as the one that has already occurred to the member, and then you should make sure that you bring the member with a straight tail before that problem stops.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And do not force the member until it is ready, and then return the bandage.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the contraction has already been softened and the bone has regained its shape and similar to those, then with your skill, rectify all of that.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive stricture, then gently loosen that one a little and let it rest for several days until the nourishment can reach it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	However, if the patient does not experience any of those causes that we have mentioned, then do not let it slip within approximately 20 days or around those times.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And let the hand of the patient be suspended over them for their skill in moving and make them sleep on their backs.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or if it is strongly restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the complexions and the dispositions of the skill.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the little finger and those mentioned.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You should know that at the pinch of the knee and at the joints of those mentioned tart, there is a fracture, and do not touch them without proper tools.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When the patient has a fracture or wound, make sure they lie down and equalize their legs, and then place your hand on the extended leg.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then, the assistant extends the broken bones and the doctor aligns those that are misaligned with good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then make sure to apply bandages and poultices, unless there is a pus cavity; and then place your hand on the wound according to its size, and you have already wrapped it in linen.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the splint is in the parts behind the belly, then make it similar to a sling, and command the patient to hold that with their belly splinted; and then tighten the cloth longwise.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the cloth that supports the belly should be in the one where it is lifted, so that the belly is applied to the palm; and tighten it according to what is needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is at the parts deformed, place your hand on the other side of the part below in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; then place the structure, as if it is being rolled over the palm between the mentioned bones.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If the fracture occurs in any of the bones of the mentioned joints, then if it is a long bone, place your hand as strong as possible on the palm and if you wish, place a small straight object to elevate the fracture and not make it worse.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture occurs in any of the other mentioned joints, such as the elbow, wrist, ear, or ankle, then place your hand equally and lightly on the palm; or all of them continuously, which is better; or place it over that small straight object, as we have said in the long bone.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your treatment, and apply that, the position of abscess cautery and opposition — against the operation — against that which covers when any cause of those occurs, according to how it is repeated in the narrative.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the bone in the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the thigh is broken and is felt second to have changed to the part denoted and to the most inner one.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done by placing one bandage over the fracture and another under the fracture, and the patient lies on their stomach and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the assistant extends the entire bandage to its part according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is near the root of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed at the back to the part of the tendon, so that the extension can be in front, and the other bandage under the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the fracture is near the root, then the bandage should be placed at the back to the root, and the extension to the parts behind.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor should equalize the bone by putting their fingers inside as much as possible until it is reduced according to its natural shape and the bone is joined by good connection; then cover and apply ointment and bandage, unless there is an abscess in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If an abscess occurs in the area, then leave that person for several days until the abscess is ready to burst, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The structure of the bone is as follows: a cover that wraps around the fracture, bend it twice or three times, and remove the excess; then wrap the leg and the thigh in the cushion.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert the long piece of cloth between the thigh and the cushion near the ankle, and bring the ends of the cloth from the side that is less affected by the two parts, and then wrap it around the cushion and thigh to cover what remains of the bend.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And place your hand on the thigh in the location of that fracture, and place a stone on the bone of the cushion.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the empty spaces between the cushion and thigh with many cloths, so that the fracture is consolidated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin to strengthen the fracture from the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you move further away from the location of the fracture, your fracture will be smaller and more flexible and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then gradually extend two extremities of the patient to the parts behind until it reaches the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the other part to prevent the bandage from remaining in its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then place the structure over that, so that it does not cause harm to the member with corrosion, abscess, inflammation, and similar things; and if any of those causes occur, then count on removing it from there, and correct what has happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone that breaks is not broken, then try to align it as much as possible; and if you cannot, perform an operation on it and realign it, and treat that which precedes the memorization within which it should be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And some bandages are strengthened for this fracture of the bone or others that are adjusted to it, as we have said in the assistant and the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	In the restoration of the patient in such a manner-made bed, do not cause the patient to have paralysis; and if restored alone, another cushion should be applied to the other side, then it is necessary that the paralyzed one is quickly supported.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You should know that the cushion is strengthened in several days or a few months or a few months, and all this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the humerus bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that the fracture of the humerus bone heals slowly, but does not cause any damage to the nearby veins.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it causes any damage to the fracture, then it is only a crack or tear in its parts, and this is a common or less common problem, and over this all depends on the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of the humerus bone should be equal to that which was broken from its parts, and this is done by joining and connecting it according to what is possible in equality, facility, and manufacture.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then place a poultice on that round stone, if necessary for it; and apply pressure with a tight bandage to this.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the arrangements that we have recommended for other fractures, such as applying a poultice and similar to those that are suitable to prevent any accident from occurring to it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You should know that in the ribs there are two bones of which one is large and is called the rib; and the other is thin and is called the costal.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And according to the type of fracture that occurs in those two bones of the arm, and for that reason, the same restoration is made as for the arm; and the operation of this is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken at once, the ribs are completely split in two.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thin bone is broken, the ribs are split into two parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the largest bone is broken, then remove it, as this is not something you can treat.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension and equalization and ligation of the fingers according to that.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the leg is not healing due to lack of nourishment, then the extension should be less and looser, and it will help your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is a cause for an operation on the arm, and that is when you equalize the splints and complete the entire operation, then you will place weights of iron that are placed behind the causes that are placed on the sole, and they are made entirely of palm branches; align them with those that have a small groove, and do not be from the hands, and be the longest among them according to the length of the leg, and the deltoid into the farthest back.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each cloth in two folds according to its length, and place one on the side of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be from the deltoid into the lowest part of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the two sticks in three places on the patient's limbs and at the middle one, where this structure is forbidden to lean on the right and left parts, and it is a good distance.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then a small stick of the length of the patient's back is administered; and it is placed on the back to prevent that one from moving.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially be careful that you do not do this in a fracture, and when it is placed properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the patient every day and study that one for the next day's study, and guard it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and if something happens to any of those, then stop that one until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus and bones of the foot and those called.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Fracture does not occur to the talus at all; but fractures occur in some of the bones of the foot; and those called also have few fractures, and do not occur to them alone but in the middle of the arrangement.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and sometimes those bones are lifted above themselves between them, then place the patient on their side with their affected foot on the prepared ground as if they were walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place your foot on that which is lifted from those bones, and step on them, and press, and equalize them until they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then place a poultice and a bandage above, and place a small table under their belly with two ends placed on it.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then place strength to that leg and its structure descending, so that you have wrapped it with cloths and other causes of which they are in need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And as they pass three or four days, then you will remove the bandage, where you found the bones equalized, or they were broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is as follows with consents.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if they say that they are broken, then restore those, and equalize them as they were and recommend to you in the restoration of those of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place your hand along the length of the wound, and put a poultice on it; and then place this table under the foot, which you have prepared, and strengthen that wound with a proper bandage.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If that which is cut from the bones is two or three or more, then place your hand on each of those wounds, wrapping them in a cloth lion, strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and have one of the caps of the table in front of the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes that have been told to you in other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and pause at all accidents with that which covers it.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the thigh bone and the patella and the tibia of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone is cut, then perform that incision in the lower belly, and place it on the side of the back a little, and keep it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife should hold the head of the child, and do it as if she were expecting; and then the woman should be gently struck, and her back should be raised little by little, until all that is gone into the part of the head that is expected and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powder on her back, and when she wants to urinate, help her to do so easily and take the urine, and return it according to the method by which it was taken at the beginning, and then return to the first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Do this for seven days or around those days, until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take an ox bladder and stretch it over the throat of the child with a catheter; and inflate the entire bladder into the head of the child, and blow through the catheter until the bladder is inflated with the head, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled from the outside and remain for several days as recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bones of the human or female pelvis are fractured, then administer in the restoration and puncturing of that which we have recommended for the bone of the thigh.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is directed should not be concealed in these nearby fractures and that it does not occur, rather to the one who has some study and uses and understands this my free movement; because that fracture signifies a you in the greater dispositions of the way of directing in the restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore understand be.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the fracture of the man when it is broken, take gauze of cotton, and put the fracture in that; and then place a covering of cloth over it, and be wrapped, and be left for three days or around those, and be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of bone fractures when they are broken.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the one to whom the fracture occurs broken, and especially if the bone is very large like that of the thigh or of the assistant, or similar to that, which you should be and bicuspid teeth those soon if the conditions of bicuspidism are to you or testify so as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the pain continues, then cover your hand with a cloth and gently blow powdered sulfur on it, unless there is another cause.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that day, and do not prolong it unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs carefully, then leave the restoration of it until the sixth day, before the abscess disappears, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause further harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the bone is broken and protrudes above the flesh, then cover your hand with a cloth and reduce it to its place and equalize it with your other hand for ease and less extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not to your preparation and the equality of it with your other hand, then reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers, and the width of which is according to the size of the wound; and for this reason, it is necessary for the doctor who uses these three or four according to the amount needed in the cure in all cases of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be straight, and it should be in the correct position during surgery to avoid bending the instrument over the other.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have a sharp tip that is marged in the other's sharp parts; and its underside should be broad and its top should go into the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called "volentz atelarem" in Greek, which is its name.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Because the end of it should be placed on the tip of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push that into a groove inside which the bone returns, and it should be equal to some balance.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then force you to equal the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of it broken is thin, and you do not take that with the instrument for good reason, then you should insert the end of that bone into where the instrument has power over that.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone to all of that which we have recommended, then insert that which is necessary for it from the scissors that we have said; or saw that which is a tooth in some way that is possible to you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then remove those that are in the bones of the spine and small scraps.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bones are reduced, and the reduction causes the patient great pain, you will know that the bones have not returned to their natural position; and therefore do this so that you greatly benefit the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bones is complete, and then submerge it in a strong sterile black cloth, especially if it is in summer, and do not place it on any wound or other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not cause further damage and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stitches at the time of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound exposed until it is closed with forceps and bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to strain the wound on the fracture, because such actions have been done by many doctors, and they cause damage to their patients, which is harmful.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the neck structure is loose, soft, and different from the structure of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the wound is large or bad, and you fear that the evil accidents we have mentioned might occur, and there is great pain in that place, then do not place your hand over it, but make that envelope of hard cloths in place of sticks and strong pressure on those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the wound begins to close after one or two days, then remove the cloth that you placed over it, and administer poultices, using those that are of our custom to heal wounds, such as tetrapharmacon and similar to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is convenient for you to remove the bandage and consider the wound on each day at midday and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and cover that member in such a way that the poyredura flows from it to the parts behind it to facilitate healing.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If many days pass and the wound is not consolidated or does not close on its own, then know that this is a sign of smallpox for which you should inquire about the wound and examine it carefully.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those stains, remove those that are separated and extracted, those that are not separated and put the member and cause acute pain, pierce those that are possible for you to do.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound becomes infected or putrefied, it is often due to another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then place on it one of those remedies that are suitable for it from the cure which is preceded by narration in its own chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that in which you should place your finger: when the large ones are cut, raise it over the member that is there with the bones of the cushion and the helper and similar to those of the great members, and do not assume attraction of it, nor its extraction, because many evils can occur by that which causes death; having left that inside for twenty days or thirty; and then cure the wound if you see fit, and if not, leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure of a node that occurs at the site of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Nodules occur at the site of healing from fracture, and more frequently near the joints, and is caused by the shape of the limb; and it often prevents the member from performing its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the node is recent and administers in those medicines that have stopped bleeding such as aloes, and enses, and mirabilis, and serpentaria, and acrasia, and similar to those; taking some or all of them, and confirming them with astringent, or album of honey, or astringent tincture, and place that over the node in a cloth, and bind it well over the node.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And if that stricture does not allow it to pass for several days; then remove it and apply another, until the node is reduced; or strengthen it on that plaster of descentment, which has the property of reducing everything that is inflamed in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the joint has become petrified and is causing constant pain, and it is necessary to separate it from that part of the body where it is most deeply embedded, and then incise the excess and eminent, or remove it with a sharp instrument before it becomes fully detached; and cure it within the time when it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When a fracture is restored and the limb becomes thin and fragile, it does not return to its original nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb becomes thin and fragile, it is not done for many reasons: one of which is the lack of solution of the ligament and the cord of that part, made not according to its nature; or because of excessive strictness of the ligaments before the nutrient can reach the limb; or because of excessive embrocation; or because of superfluous movement not in its proper time; or because of weakness in the body of the patient and because of his debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for that is to give the patient garlic to eat and make them drink the juice of it until their heart becomes stronger; and administer baths; and insert gauze and lettuce on it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts nourishment to it, or continues to relieve the inflammation of the affected area until the nourishment comes and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the treatment of broken bones that have been restored incorrectly and prevented surgery on them because of this.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When an injury occurs to the limb that has already been restored, immediately remove the incorrectness of the bone and the swelling, and shape it like the limb, but if the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then do not accept the word of anyone who exists and says that the limb is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But if it has already been done by foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land, and this operation is very reprehensible because it causes great fear of the death which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the stiffness and swelling are recent, then it is customary to apply a poultice made of water with softening herbs such as althea leaves and rue, mellolot, and similar ones; or make an ointment with diallaquelon well prepared; or use a mucilage of rue root mixed with honey or oil of camphor, and apply it to that; or use soft fatty figures trampled with the palm of your hand, and similar to those of the medicines that are named emmanagogues.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some remedies are dissolved in an excessive amount of the lightest oil, which is the most humid, and administered to move the limb at all parts in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the twisting has already passed and is strong and converted into stone and requires treatment with iron, then it is customary to remove the pus under the skin and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and scrape off that which exceeds the swelling of the affected part with a fine saw, and administer facilitation in that with solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the disruption of one of its joints, which prevents movement, and distorts the shape of the limb, causing severe pain and injuries on the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when dislocation occurs, it is best to reduce it as soon as possible, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes infected and it becomes difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And to avoid this, it is not recommended to move or stretch the limb during infection, because movements and pain can cause muscle cramps.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When that happens, it is recommended to cover the patient's abdomen with a cloth, and wait until the abscess stops; then apply heat and oil to the limb, and reduce it as soon as possible.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the limb should be treated with the oil that will bring memory back to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the capital letters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the shoulder enter into the part that is placed behind.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter twenty-four.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the cure of jaw dislocation.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the lower jaws are dislocated and do not articulate; and the dislocation of them is made in one of two ways: either they are repositioned from their places by a small removal, and are slightly molded; or they are dislocated entirely and completed, before they are molded at the part of the joint where the saliva of the patient flows out and which cannot hold that nor close his mouth, and the tongue of him is covered in his palate.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of it is small, then return it to its place in the greatest positions by itself.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	When the dislocation is entire and completed, then cover it so that reduction of it is administered gradually, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the patient's head, and the doctor should insert their fingers into the mouth, one at a time, on the edge of the dislocation of the jaw, inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that they insert both fingers simultaneously, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other two fingers on the cheeks, and equalize them; and command the patient to stop their jaws and remove those from each part; and the doctor should equalize the jaw and push it back into place before it returns to its original position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are frequently dislocated, then administer evaporated water and oil, until a light reduction is made and do not delay the reduction of both jaws, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And then, when they are equalized and the patient's mouth is closed and not molded, then place some woolen cloths on those parts, and make a paste of cera and oil, to facilitate the movement of the jaws.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And the patient's head should be between two pillows, so that it does not move to the front or left; and do not force any cause; having the same view, open his mouth with a spoon, when the pains are relieved and his jaw is unlocked, then open that which you want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And that should be administered with ease, and do not force the opening of the mouth for food and drink and defecation, until the jaw is unlocked and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws at any time and they are not converted to their normal positions, then use heat and constant soda, and frequently apply a warm cloth to the patient's abdomen, and frequently vomit with pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see that, know that it is fatal; and those who experience that die within a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the sternum and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The sternum is not dislocated from the attachment to the chest due to its continuous connection with it; and some ribs are dislocated at the front part, and that is felt.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then cover the area with your hand with strong pressure, so that it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then place a poultice and powders on that and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The extremity of that which is attached to the chest and is continuous with it, is not dislocated on any day; therefore, cover it as we have said and as it is in your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then place a poultice and powders on that, and compression, and command the patient to remain at rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	About the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the shoulder joint and then behind.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, and this is done sharply; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder blade; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most commonly dislocated and deformed and sticking out behind the shoulder joint, and especially in those where the meat is thin, it is easily dislocated; but in those where there are thick flesh, it is more difficult to be stuck out.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And it often happens to many men that they are hit or struck by a blow, and the muscle of this is infected with an abscess, and it is swollen because it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, you should first examine this before you proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known as dislocation when the parts behind the tilt are separated; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the undislocated muscle, because there are distinct differences between them; and you feel at the top of the concave part of the muscle where the cap of the muscle is like a bone, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to its usual place, or move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you must press or pull, and you should feel a distinct movement, and it should not be hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is called recent reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of this is that the assistant raises the patient's arm above the dislocated part; and places their hand behind the tilt, and strengthens the joint in its usual place, and the assistant raises the patient's arm, and extends it again; and places it behind where it returns.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return, and from the beginning of the dislocation, days pass, then the patient should be given a warm bath and administered an embrocation that softens and numbs, similar to if they have high fevers, and fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back and supported under their body by a cushion made of wool that is evenly between elevation and stricture, and the doctor places their hand on the patient's calf, elevates the head of the muscle in virtue, and pulls the patient's hand so that it does not hang down, and another servant holds the patient's head, so that it does not hang down, because that is where it returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is taller than the patient, and stand on the side of the other, and insert his muscle between the patient's thighs and elevate the patient's thighs to the parts above until the patient is suspended in air, and another servant pulls the patient's hand from their lower abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is heavier, then hang up the other cause that is suspended, so that it returns to its place quickly, because the dislocation returns soon.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced according to another method: and let there be a long stick shaped like the head of a mortar, not too thick or thin, and placed behind the patient; then let the patient's head rest on the end of the stick covered with lion cloth, and the patient stand along the length of the stick, and extend the hand of the other part to the parts behind the other part; and strengthen the parts of the other part, because the joint returns to its place at speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this cure: and let you take a stick the length of which is between two fists, and the width of which is four fingers, and the thickness of which is adjusted according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place a lion cloth roundly on the head so that the stick does not slip the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then let the patient's head rest behind the stick, and extend the hand or arm over the stick through the parts behind, and let the stick be tied to the support and the arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place the arm on a scale according to its height, and the hand should be extended to the parts behind, and the other one should be suspended from the other side, because the joint is soon affected.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And with the instrument of the patient, complete it according to each possible method, and then cover it with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; and place an ointment prepared from powdered myrrh and album of egg on all the muscle, as it is rolled up above, and then place a bandage of stricture decently behind the tingling. And the bandage should be rolled up over the ointment, and the hand of the patient should be attached to the collar of the patient, and let it be, and not be tired the hand of the patient for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And let the food of the patient be given in small amounts, until the member is comfortable, because it is more useful for the healing of him.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And let the food be given more frequently than seven or five and let it be exercised with a movement; and if it is stopped and not made soft, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to swelling caused by moisture that has accumulated in it or for another reason, then apply a pointed cautery three times, as indicated in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandage and splint are reduced due to some swelling, and it is not fixed, catheterized, or able to be raised to its parts above, then know that the nerves of that joint, which are at the top of the muscle, have been cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be healed in that place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	To reduce the dislocation of that joint, which is made by pushing and extending the chest and back parts, as it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And the other bandage is applied to that joint, and it is cured within the time it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If the healing in that member is delayed and its movement is slow, then the patient uses moist compresses until that swelling is reduced and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the cure of dislocation of the jaw.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the jaw is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and if it is dislocated in all parts, especially at the part where the jaw meets the other jaw, and the dislocation is not corrected from behind the skin or behind the touch according to any figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the jaw dislocated, it does not return to its place, this is your manifest indication that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And when you see the abscess, reduce the dislocation as soon as possible, because if you see the abscess, it is difficult to reduce it, and it is not cured in all cases; and especially when it is at the parts behind, which is worse than all other species of dislocation, and causes more pain, and more dangerous movements away from that jaw, which can lead to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	When restoring the patient, when it is possible to reduce it, the hand of the patient should be extended by two people, and the arm of the patient should be expanded, and the surgeon's fingers should be on the back and over the patient, and he should push the joint towards the palm of his hands or the edge of his palm where it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is at the joints, then return it by bending the arm of the patient and his own arm, until it strikes the back and the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And if two assistants are extending the arm, then have two assistants hold it in place so that it does not return to its original position.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate the arm from all parts, so that it is wrapped in a cloth folded longwise over the hand of the patient, or a bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the surgeon touches the joint with his hand, apply some oil to it so that it is one of those causes that help in the lubrication of the joint and facilitate its return.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of the abdomen that is placed on that pad in which there is stypicity and execution of the album of honey, and it is extracted from the stricture descent, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and it is left for a while.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it is loosened; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen the ligament of it and leave it there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strong, then you repeat the bandage and ligament, and leave it there for a while until it is extracted; and then loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it happens to the gravity in the reduction of the joint, and its position is in movement, then administer humidity in bath and friction subtle, and compression, until it is removed; or pause over the moved joint, this is a greasy cloth; and then it is tied, and left there on the bone and the new skin.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that, and put that in the bath; and when it is done, then you rub the joint with a cold friction, and then repeat over the moved joint, this is a rhomboid of movement, the first, second, and third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	with a sponge, until it is clean.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place it on the wound of a wet and burnt cowhide and stretch it over that; and make some poultices, because that is wet and reduce it to its proper state.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, it is at the joint that is between the arm and the chest.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The shoulder of the chest is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of that dislocation is difficult, and the opposite is of the other joints, but rather be careful that there is speed in the reduction of it at the time when it is dislocated, because the joint may become inflamed or something happens to the pus in the inflammation.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of that dislocation is that you place the joint of the shoulder of the patient on a table and the assistant extends the arm of that, and the doctor places his hand or his palm on the imminence of the joint, and pushes it inside so that it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	May it be considered if the palm is already placed on the belly of the patient, then place the patient's hand on a table to extend and reduce; and if the dislocation is previous, then position the patient's hand intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand is close to the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, good; and if not, then apply this treatment to allow the abscess to drain and leave that; and do not repeat that, because otherwise, there will be no softening or healing of the joint before the days pass.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	May it be considered that the joint is still tortuous; and if the patient does not notice any cause, but the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then know that the nerves are trapped or trapped, and do not engage in this, but rather strengthen with a pointed cautery for the joint's cavity and forcefully apply that.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And when the abscess has returned, then place it over the dressing that we have recommended, and let it be drained and strengthened for several days; and afterwards, remove it and let it be drained and let the hand of the patient be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the patient's movement is obstructed and there is some gravity in it, then apply a cooling tail and some friction with certain movements, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	About the cure of the mentioned dislocations.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some movements cause the mentioned dislocations in all parts.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of those mentioned is dislocated at the back of the hand or on the belly, then press the dislocated part and push it towards the thumbs, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the mentioned part, and suspend the one that holds the part where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and stretch it until it is equal to the other one on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is not yet straight, apply the second method to that, and do not stop pulling it on that day and exercising the movement, and apply the second one at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	If the patient's abdomen is dislocated and you tie that part to another, then perform the first surgical operation on it until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And do the same when other parts are dislocated.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the dorsal vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the dorsal or neck vertebrae, and several other vertebrae remain unattached from those locations, then there is no cure for it, as the patient will die.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And in such cases, the patient's excretion is forced against their will, and they cannot retain it; and other symptoms soften the muscles of that part or the ribs of that part or the shoulder blades of that part or one of those; or if one vertebra remains unattached from that location, then other symptoms are softened and other symptoms are made to remove those in four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then it is softened at the back parts and is called lumbar spine.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	If the patient's condition is such that the prolapse has occurred due to pregnancy, then in that case, neither cure nor complete healing can be achieved for that.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In those cases where it occurs due to childbirth or due to percussion or similar to those mentioned by the ancients, regarding the methods of treatment for prolapse, which is most beneficial; however, I have already opened and exposed that from which the fewest exceptions can be made, due to its proximity to the understanding and explanation of the matter, which I have demonstrated with various instruments of that kind, and which I will show you.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And say that in prolapse which occurs due to the parturition at the chest, there is neither cure nor healing for that; and similarly in that which is made on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, there is no cure except for the one that occurs naturally in the back, which I have recommended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be extended on their face over a flat surface as close to the ground as possible, and extended with a moistened instrument so that the chest of the patient does not remain exposed.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then place a stick straight under them, leaning against the ground at the end of the bed near their head, and another stick in front of their feet on the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister should hold the stick, and not be stationary in the pit; and another minister should hold the other one according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap a blanket over the patient's head and leave the tiger-like claws firm; extend the end of the blanket to the stick that should be under their head, and tie it there; and strengthen the other blanket over their legs, below their knees, and hold their belly; and then adjust all the blankets and tie them on the other stick that should be under their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister should extend the blanket to the part of the stick where it is placed, and not remain idle with the two sticks and the blankets in the places where they are placed, but rather not be stationary as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his hands on the strong spine between the shoulder blades, or on a table, and adjusts the patient's feet under him until he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If he does not return by this method, then take a table that is three arm spans long or wide, and place it against the wall where we have said that the patient should be located in between the extremity of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the patient's head on the strong spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and stretches him until the spine is straightened and he returns to his location.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the back of the patient by turning it towards the mat; and you should be on the ground with the patient's head at the back of two sticks, the length of which is an arm, and the patient's head at the back of another stick; and the length between each stick should be a palm, and it has been done in each stick by placing a thorn in the one where the turn returns, and each one should be stopped on the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let there be a fourth staff in which it is placed, and let it be rotated in the two openings of the two staffs.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is an opening in which the staff is formed, its length being one palm and a finger, which is rotated; and in the other two staffs, it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the cords that you have tied in the chest of the patient in the opening that is to be placed on his head, and the cords that you have tied in his thighs in the rotation that is to be placed on his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then place each rotation and have a servant who turns the rotation with his hand, and the doctor equalizes the sacrum as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the rotation:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the sacrum is returned and the area is equalized, then apply an abundant amount of dry earth on the bandage, and stop; and place a table over it with a width of three palms or around those, and its length is the quantity that took up the area of the gel, and on the side of the sacrum, it is.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a bandage that we have mentioned, and use the patient as a source of subtle nutrition until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any imminence in the location at the end of the healing, then apply medicines that are moilifico and liniscan to the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is already administered in that location, the sheet of plum.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes some wounds occur in the back of the spine, and it is caused by that dislocation; and that bone which already immines for that reason, that it should not be done to that person with this medicine, which would make you die quickly.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the hip joint and the muscle joint do not only suffer from dislocation, but also from those things that happen to other joints with slight removal and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways, that it is dislocated at the parts inside, or at the parts forward, or at the parts upward, or at the parts backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is mainly dislocated at the parts that are inside, and sometimes at the parts in front or the parts behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And when you adjust the bed of the healthy person for the sick one, it is longer and thinner than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee but must lean on it, and this is where the pus from the abscess may spread to the head of the mattress.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the reason for the person who has suffered from this dislocation is that the accidents of that one are opposite to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the reason for the person who has suffered from this dislocation in front is that the bed of the other side is stretched out too much, but it does not bend towards that one which causes pain in the knee, and if it is pierced to go, it cannot be placed under that one; and the urine of that one is retained, and the swelling of that one is abscess, and you must place the ambulance of that one on the thigh.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	When the person who has suffered dislocation of the parts behind is unable to extend their elbow, nor can they bend the arm that bends them, and the cushion under them is shorter than the other, and the bending is softened, and the head of the cushion is placed at that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The method of reducing these species of dislocation is that you consider, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already been healed by having it close to you, then administer reduction of it according to its arrangement, but not entirely in that cure; therefore, do not make an attempt in that way.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In that of which the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should turn the joint and extend it to the parts behind and to the parts in front, and also to the right and left, because that force returns and does not require another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this way, then you should prepare a strong cautery and extend the cushion of the part that is farthest away from the arm, or to their hands, or to the bandage that is placed over the cushion above the elbow; and another minister should extend the hand of that one above in such a way that it holds their hands behind the tips of their fingers; and then strongly hold the lion's mouth on the edge of the cushion, and another minister should clean the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if it is the extension of the limb or the part between the armpit to the scapula, or the part behind the shoulder blade.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if it is the extension of all those in a procession while the patient is lying on his side and leaning forward.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is special for all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it is good; and otherwise, it is necessary for every special case to say what the cure is.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the patient's own dislocation, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts below, make sure the patient is lying on his back; and place your hand on the ribs in that area where the head of the rib meets the location that was previously leaning forward; and extend the ligament from the armpit to the most distant part of the scapula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another assistant strongly grasps the patient's arms, and presses the large area of the patient's back and extends to the parts forward by strong extension, so that it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this particular treatment is the most effective cure for this member that has been reduced compared to other treatments.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	However, if you are excused from following this treatment for some reason, then it is best to place the patient's feet together, firmly, above and below the ankles.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each be equal to four fingers, and let the patient's cushion be extended more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then let the patient be suspended over the top of the bed, and in the middle; and let the length of it from the ground be equal to two spans.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then command a strong young man to pull down the head of the cushion, and let another young man suspend it from the patient, and the other young man to strengthen the joint by pulling upwards, so that the joint returns to its original position at speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	However, in the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the part of the forearm, let the patient lie on their back as we have recommended in the previous chapter; and let the ligament be strengthened over the cushion of the patient properly and over their chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then place two cushions under them, one under their feet and the other under their head; and then adjust the cushioned cushions to the middle of the bed, so that the patient is not dampened by the cushion being between their thighs, so that the extension to the parts behind is not stretched.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each assistant extends their part, and the doctor places their hand over the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you follow the reduction, it is generally good; and if not, pause carefully over that and have what we said in the blue-printed paper for that equality.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May it be that the patient does not move their arms comfortably.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is to the parts behind, then it is likely that the cushion should be extended more, and according to this method described above on the bed; and the doctor places the palm of their hand on the longitudinal patient, and then covers the other hand with that, and at that coverage pauses the extended part to the parts behind at the part of the denol.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the back parts, it is not recommended that the patient be extended at the back parts and raised on the ground; it is recommended to place a hard cause under them, as if they were lying on two cushions; and they should be placed on their face and their limbs extended, as we have said, without causing pain.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is recommended to apply pressure with a hard table on the area where the joint is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is completed according to what has been recommended, and if the joint is not immediately returned to its place, and you extend two cushions from the patient, and when you see that those cushions are equal and the patient extends his second cushion and expands that side, then you know that the member has been returned according to what has been recommended; and then you adjust two cushions and press and extend the bend where the limb is not injured in any of the parts; and adhere to the patient for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then remove the bandage and apply it again, and place one cushion under one side and another under the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those joints in their proper place, know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient get up.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of softening, then return and apply that, and extract it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then remove that, and apply it again in the bath for each person for several days until they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of dislocation of the thumb.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The thumb is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated at the first joint, at the second joint, and at the third joint; and it is not dislocated at the fourth joint.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to place their cushion on the side; then know that the thumb is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all the patient's limbs is done by placing the patient upright, unless they are already extended on their back, then place yourself on top of them; press your face against the patient's face, and hold their foot between your feet; and then make sure to hold the patient's hand in your palms, and reinforce those fingers that are above the patient's hand on their wrist, and another minister extends their leg into place as the patient's hand returns to its position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the relief of the patient is that their bed will adhere to the cushion and lift them up off the ground.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply that plaster to the bed and hold the cushion against it, and then tie those same bands for three or four days, and then remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's bed for any days until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of the patient to you is excused, then administer strong extension to the bandages that were mentioned in the previous cure for the hand.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle sometimes becomes re-located by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated in the opposite direction, and the dislocation of which is made at the front or at the back parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the symptom of the dislocation of which is that sometimes the ankle becomes swollen due to the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The cure of the dislocation of which is of great difficulty, and it is that it should be extended with ease to the hands and should return as soon as possible.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When it is dislocated in the opposite direction, then one should make the patient lie on their back, and hold a strong and skilled person behind their back in the middle part of which.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you should place your right hand on the most raised part of the foot, and your left hand on the part farthest from the foot in the position of the calf.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then bring the foot to your hand, and hold the left side with two fingers, and extend the left side; and push the chest of the foot against the right side of the bed.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And then make those two fingers as you have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the chest of the foot against the third finger on the bed, and you are at the elbow.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if you return in one finger or two in this manner, and if you see the foot equal, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation, until it returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing it at that place, then have the patient lie on their side on the ground, and place a pillow under their buttocks, and put a blanket between their thighs, and you have covered them with a cloth so that they do not slip.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the assistant of the patient holds their thighs, and another assistant extends the foot to their hands or to the cloth that lies on the back of the foot; and then each assistant should be extended against the extension of their own part, and the pillow should be extended between the thighs of the patient, so that the body of the patient is not pulled away from its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor should approach the dislocation with his hands, and another servant hold the clean cloth at the parts behind, so that the dislocation returns to its ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and you declare the patient's health from its reduction, then pause to apply plaster and tightly bandage that part of the foot to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful not to injure the nerves that are behind the talus, so that the bandage over that part is not too tight and does not harm it.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it like that for two or three days; if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And remove it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for fourteen days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to walk in that space, do not do so until the dislocation is completely dissolved and corrupted, and avoid anything that does not allow healing.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if the abscess bursts, then carefully administer in its cavity what was described in our previous narrative, in another place for healing and relief, until it is completely healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter thirty-four.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the cure for the dislocation of those of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	That which is dislocated should be moved as little as possible; and this is not difficult, but rather easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	However, if the dislocation is in the joints of the back of the foot, then do so by placing the patient on their side, either on the ground or on a table, and remain there as if they were lying down.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you will stand by the patient's foot, and place their injured foot on what is near the joints, and gently press that towards where it returns, and see that it is as equal as possible and does not appear in the prominent position.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place a table under their foot that holds the entire foot, with two caps, and strengthen that with proper structure for three days; and then remove that and let them rest from walking for several days, until it is strong and can be assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the various types of dislocation that can occur due to pain or fracture or any other cause.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those causes occurs, and you pierce yourself in the treatment of that and its restoration, many complications can lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that reason, do not assume that the treatment of that is known from long use, mercy and pity, late, not ardent or presumptuous; and that it uses in the beginning of medicines that ced apostemas cautz only, and leave the patient to divine judgment, but to that to which you hope salvation from perdition, am of the malady alleviation, and in which appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then make an effort to do it as soon as possible in the beginning of the cause, giving that it becomes an abscess caut.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as soon as they want, at that time administer a regimen that ced apostemas caut and heals the pain with that which is suitable for it from drying agents.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the bones of the spine that are separated, then perforate their skin, and do as we have said in the simple cases of that, in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid the second of that instrument in the ways of fear according to what was preceded by my sermon; for that is better for you to do your own Creator, and more enduring to your glory, and more salutations to your own sight, as those will see in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Here ends the words of Albucasis perfectly from which God may be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
