Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	And now begins the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by the completion of its goal in it, and by its explanations, and by its declarations, it seems to me that I have completed that which I loved for you in this treatise, which is part of surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The operation of midwifery has been completely forgotten in our region and in our time, until recently the science of it was lost, and its evidence is hidden; and no one knows about it except a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been lost and have led to errors and uncertainties until the understanding of it has been closed and its strength and art have been lengthened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I have lived in this order of this treatise in the second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work, which is necessary for addition to the declaration, and for its preparation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	In ancient times, the reason why a skilled artist was not immediately recognized as such in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and it requires practice in the science of anatomy, which was rediscovered by Galen before he knew the great benefits of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and knowing the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their hardness; and of the pulsating veins, the quiet ones, and the locations of their issuance.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for that reason called Hippocrates, who said that a name is not important, but in the work itself, and especially in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already mentioned him in the introduction of this book; because who does not know what we have said about anatomy, will not avoid falling into error by which many men have died, as I have seen too many of those, for they are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	When a doctor folly and imprudently incised an abscess of Hansen's disease on the neck of a woman, and incised some arteries in the neck so that a great deal of blood flowed into the woman, causing her to die between her hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And another doctor saw that the dragger had taken a stone from a man who had passed it in his state, and the stone was large, and he brought it to him and passed it with a tube through the urethra, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And he had already tried to extract it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, he knew that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And another doctor saw that a duke of our land was suffering from surgery, and he went to a skilled blacksmith who was experienced in the fracture in the thigh of the patient; and because of his ignorance, he extracted the fracture on the surface, with cushions and sticks of strong structure, and did not give the wound air.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then remove the bandage according to his wishes, and then remove the restraints, and then remove the leeches for several days and command that they not be applied again; and this is when the dressing and the foot become infected, and reach a point of danger.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And then I was called to him, and I removed the bandage, and he regained peace and relief from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the decay was already confirmed in the limb, so it could not be stopped, and it continued to spread through the limb until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who drained an abscess and made an ulcer, which healed in several days, until the fire of his malice was consumed by the Lord of him.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the brain is purged of melancholic humor, so it does not reach him with all iron, but rather the member that suffers from all should be held.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for that reason, children, it is necessary for you to have the operation done in two ways: one is an operation that is associated with salvation, and the other is a work that is performed in the best conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already extracted that in every place of this book where an operation is performed in which error and fear occur; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against that and lay aside that, so that the foolish do not attribute it to me and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And take up your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with ease and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way for the grace of God to lead to salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay aside the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and hold your weapons against that which makes you fear, so that your stay in your faith and your name does not escape you: because more remains to your glory, and further in the world and after your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	In some cases, however, it is said that:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat evil disease, because evil doctors are not recognized.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three sections.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The beginning of the division of the rib, and the first of the first section.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered by the head of the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the irons of cautery, and of what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second section.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and puncturing, and on ventosas, and on plagues, and on the extraction of sagitas and similar things to those, all chapter and ordered by the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third section.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of tortion and similar things to those; chapter ordered by the head of the foot, and by the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of the pointed cautery and of acute medicine and memory of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that begins the treatise on all the rib.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	That you know the quality of those points and of the remedies of it, and in what condition is prohibited cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, the speech about the quality of the cauterizing knife and its handle is a long and elaborate one, subtle for those who know it, and secretly hidden; and from there many people have spoken about it, and they have differed in their opinions, and I have taken a small part of their speeches, due to my ignorance.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Therefore, the cauterizing knife corresponds to the entire complexion universally, which is good or bad material, except for two complexions, which are tail-like materials.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the tail-like complexion and dry material, they disagree; for some say that a cauterizing knife is suitable for that, and others say the opposite of that, that a cauterizing knife is not convenient in a bad condition, which is due to its quality and dryness, because nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that bad condition tail-like and dry material be caut and dry be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And they say those who say the opposite of that, that for cauterizing it is done well in all bad condition tail-like and dry material that is in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man and its humidity to the complexion of fire, the body of a man is damp.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	I hear by the word of that person, who has experienced this thing several times before.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But may not come upon that one who has already been examined and exercised in the capital of cautery by previous practice, and knows the diversity of men's constitutions and the positions of their illnesses, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the span of time for those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other constitutions, you should not fear, and especially in moist and humid illnesses, because all doctors have been agreed upon those, and they do not disagree about the use of cautery in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and its goodness is that by cautery, medicine burns, because fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member that is cauterized and does not harm the other members unless it is adjusted with a small amount.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	And the action of medicine burning reaches those in the members who are already sick, and it often causes pain to come into the sick member and often causes harm.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	When the fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do anything but superfluously, we already know this through experience and the length of time spent studying the art over the truth of the causes; and for this reason, I am excused from the length of this speech. And if it were not for the fact that it is not read aloud in this place, and the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels evils, the philosophical demonstrative speech would be sharpened in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	You should know, children, that the time when it is appropriate to make a cautery and rest is at the best time of primeval.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm caused by time is submerged in the benefit of which the cautery thrown is made, and especially if it is for pain or necessary pain, quickly and firmly, the ones that do not suffer delay because of the fear of those who come with malice, which is greater than small harm entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And do not catheterize in your feet, or, sons, that is only understood by the common people and foolish doctors, because that malady which is cured by cauterization is not always disagreeable, and they stop that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they say for that, because cauterization is not only in a place of medicine which alters the appearance and dries out the moistures which are the cause of the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But rather cauterization is used excessively in medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that their malady returns in some time of the day, according to the appearance of the patient and the location of their malady, and its virtue, and that which is prepared in the body of the patient from the aggregation of the superfluities in it, and that which is obtained to it in the acquisition of foods and similar causes; but the malady in which cauterization is administered is a subtle malady of few superfluities and moistures, such as cautery for tooth pain and similar things, it is possible that in it does not return that pain, but rather it is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And more commonly, people call the pointed cautery the best remedy in medicine, and they say that it is not a cure that is appropriate for me to use in this case, as they believe that there is no cure that can be achieved through medicine or any other cause that would approach the use of a cauterizing needle.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and they understand that the pointed cautery is not the best remedy in medicine unless they administer the methods of treatment in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause, they administer some cauterizing needle, and it is appropriate for that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here it is understood that the pointed cautery is not the best remedy in medicine, but they understand this as many people and some foolish doctors believe.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that gold is better than iron for cauterizing, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the location of cauterizing does not matter, since it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen some people who are good and some who are bad, and cauterizing with gold is better than with iron if you do it in this way; however, when you make cauterizing with fire made of gold, it is not your declaration, because it is prepared according to the amount that you want by the heat of the gold, and because it receives the cold; and if you adjust it on the fire, the gold melts for the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for that, a pointed cautery of iron is made to us slightly and more closely to the direction of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter in the second chapter of the cautery, and I have ordered those who enter between the feet, so that the patient asks what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for head pain caused by cold and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery applies moisture and cold to the body part of which these causes are the main factors, causing corrosion, from the head to the parts of the hands and feet, and many sleep, and tooth pain and jaw, and generally all evil that comes from cold, such as paralysis, hardening and apoplexy, and similar in those evils.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first commands the patient to take a laxative medicine to cleanse his head, for three or four nights, according to the patient's ability and age and habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command the one who has the sharp razor to shave that part between your hands on a chair, and place your hands over their chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the palm of your hand on the razor blade between their fingers.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when you reach the desired location, mark that spot and then apply the pointed cautery made from olive oil of this shape:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that on the location well, gradually applying pressure until it is firmly attached, and you should rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then slightly lift your hand and look at the location, and if you see that some of the bone has been exposed, like the amount of gravel, then lift your hand, and if it does not return to its original position, then use the other tool mentioned earlier, if it is cold, before it becomes visible from the bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the location and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your hand on the burned area and hold it over the flame to destroy the scar of the fire.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the tetraformic ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that as soon as the plague is opened, the arm becomes more flexible and more useful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say that the cord should be cauterized inside the bone, and it should be held with the cauterizer until a piece of the bone is stuck to it.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then scrape off that which is stuck to the bone, and then apply the ointment.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cauterizer should reach the back, until it penetrates strongly into the bone before it breaks, and this is the way to make small nails:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate that from that place the fumes of the head come out.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be healed until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these two types of cauteries used in all men, except in some who are secondarily afraid; and if you leave that one, it is better to avoid it when possible, because the head is often revealed by the solution of continuity of which we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of a fragile nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first type of cautery is safer and better for me, and from that one, you should avoid it to save the work and ensure safety.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the head cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When the head suffers from chronic and long-lasting pain, and this is prolonged in the patient, and uses garlic, toothpicks, capipurges, ointments, guatz, cadels, gualinas, and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cauterizer that they have not used recently, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not fragile and easily broken, then that cauterizer should use another cauterizer.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that on the top of his head with a pointed cautery where the hair is separated.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the hair and expose the bone to the extent that we have found, and cauterize that with a pointed cautery on the back of his head in the place called the occipital fossa, — and that is the place where the pillow is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And let your hand remain still, and do not expose the bone, because the patient will suffer great pain different from all other scalp cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	I would say that this cautery is in this place, because it is used to cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than that which is used to cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Third chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the ancient non-antiseptic cauterization of the eyebrow.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the pain in the part of the head is severe, or extends to the forehead, remove the medicines that make the head sweat, and administer the other cure, which I have mentioned in the treatment of diseases; and if none of this helps, then cauterization in that place is done in two ways: either with an acute cauterizing instrument or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May the pointed cautery be used as a medical tool to remove a splinter from the hand, and then apply ointment to the affected area and bandage it.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then make an incision in the area of pain on the temple with a sharp knife, deep enough to reach the affected area, but not so deep as to reveal it.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply a strong compression bandage to the affected area for three hours; and then remove the bandage and treat the wound for two or three days, and then apply a poultice over the area where the wound is located.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, you can perform this with some medical tools that I have written about in the aforementioned treatise on medical instruments.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The pointed cautery is used in this manner: light the cautery with this method:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a claviule, because its head is shaped like a carnation, with some curvature, and in the middle of it is a small hollow.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand on the location of the pain, and hold it -- to prevent the laceration from being stuck together -- and turn the small iron at high speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of the wound that is stuck together by the nature of the cautery is such that it covers most of the body, and you lift your hand to prevent the artery from being stuck together, which is there, so that no blood flow occurs.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a bandage soaked in salt water to the location, and place it there for three days; and then apply a soft bandage, and then treat with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cauterize the end of the cutting instrument according to the cautery, and guard yourself from injury to the artery in this improperly antiquated manner.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cauterization of improperly antiquated instruments.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat the instrument that we have said about the previous treatment, and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if you do not improve the treatment, and sometimes by the disease that does not allow you to use the first cautery of medicine or the cautery of fire, then you should ignite the cutting instrument inside the body before it is fully burned, so that it is long enough to cover the location of the pain, or that one; and place your hand on a firm and strong position when you pierce the wound and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is damaged by chewing, and that the jaw not be stuck and the nerves that are affected by it, and that it does not become spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of blood flow from the artery that is abscessed, where in its abscission there is fear, and much more for those who do not know what it is and are not studious and do not spread it; and leave the operation in its beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will remember the regimen of blood flow from an accident to the artery according to the same method, in its place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this disease that does not allow this cautery and sees the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle loc of the head as we have reported, and cure the wound before it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter of strangulation of the artery with two points, and this is the best cauterization and more conforming.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cauterization of gout pain in the joints.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain is felt in the joint due to cold humors and has been treated with active causes and other treatments as mentioned in the previous section, and the pain does not subside, then use the cautery, and this is the one without points, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then bring the point close to the heat, and it should be moved around the entire joint as if it were turned, or in the circuit of each one if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	While holding the cautery, slowly move it along the edge of the joint as if you were touching it gently.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the pointed cautery is used in all joints, and it is felt, then cure the places before they become healthy again.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cauterization of torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture that is cured and cannot be treated with other than the specific remedies that come from flexibility, as we have mentioned in the sections of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the specific area due to dryness or spasm of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that area of torture with jewels and capipurgi and guarguarismes, and do not compare your treatment, then you should cauterize the patient with three cautery points: the first at the golden ratio, the second slightly below their temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery in the opposite direction of the affected area, as softening only occurs in the healthy part.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The form of cauterization is that you cauterize that area with the cautery in the direction of the golden ratio, a small one on the tip of the nose, another on the temple, the longest of which should be second to the length of the first, and place your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the specific part of the codex is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a specific tool for the butcher, the shape of which is given in the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	May it however be more subtle than that one has a few days ago; and cover the area with a cloth to prevent excessive greasiness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the area with that which is given as a process until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the cautery for ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and cured with that which we have said, and does not affect your medication or the patient's temperature, then cauterize that area with four cautery: on all the hairs of his head; and with a cauterizing instrument, as we have said; and cauterize in the crown.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is made according to what has been said.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and more behind; and then care for that which has been processed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of the cautery for forgetfulness caused by a pimple.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	When giving medicine to the patient at the beginning, give them large, strong pills and let them chew on them.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the entire head of the patient and place a poultice made according to the description in the treatise on the wound.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then place some bandages on it, which is the use of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Do that second, according to the order you have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if it is well done; and if not, then make three points on the back part of his head, which should be placed from the most outward part of the head to the most inner part of the head.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Then place the largest amount of the said between each point, and then care for the point with the cautery that is used.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you are adding more and the patient is bearing it well, then make the point in the middle; and if you add more, then cauterize that over both toes.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then care for it until it is healed; and the cautery should be shaped according to the form given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cauterization of the perineum and the softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	That you process in the softening of the head and that you have mentioned; and then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that pointed cautery on the middle part of the head, and cauterize over all the corners of the head, and cauterize over the back part of it, and three cauterizations on the spines of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the patient's illness of softening the body of three of those and the patients tolerant and the illness is strong, then cauterize that pointed cautery over the spines of the back, and afterwards cauterize into when it is completely quiet of the neck muscles of the patient, and raise the left hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then care for that until it is healed, and this be cauterization olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is by flexion.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, you should first modify the patient's mind at the beginning of their illness and on the other side, the cure that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then give them garlic and mustard, which the servant has modified, by giving it for several days, with good nutrition.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that part with a cauterizing instrument in the middle of the back of the head according to the previous method, and with another cauterizing instrument at the occiput of the patient, and on each part of the head, cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize that part with the cauterizing instruments that I have mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body over the spine of the neck and the spine of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use olive oil as prescribed.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then place a thin cauterizing instrument according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of the cautery for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and thin, and the humors are thick and heavy, then cautery is applied to those parts where we have said that they have a paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and tends towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him that which cleanses his brain according to the water that has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then remove the cap from the patient's head, and make a decent cut on his scalp over the circle, and place that in the middle of his head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be lying down, and held from all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then place a liniment; and it is more suitable for an ancient sheep's bladder.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And scald that over the fire for heating, which is suitable for the patient when it is most in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that in the middle of his head over the circle, and let it cool him until it is dispersed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And give the patient this medicine throughout the week, along with the other treatment until they are healed; or if you want, make small points on the affected area, following the most of the body, but have your hand on a pointed cautery: this is a special type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And place your hand on that swollen area in bear's grease or gray deer.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of the application of water descending in the womb.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared to you that the beginning of water in the womb occurs by the symptoms I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient water to drink that melts the top of their head, and keep that from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command the patient to shake their head, and make points on the middle of their head with a pointed cautery; and then make points on two temples if it is the beginning of water in two wombs, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one womb.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut all the veins and tendons that are behind the heel; and place the cautery in that long area on the side of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Watch for blood flow when the cautery is applied; and if you see blood flow from there, apply some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you should have knowledge of the method that is used for extracting tendons and treating those abscesses and preventing blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Some veins are cauterized in the neck behind two bones, which are usually produced by two cautery points.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears from the ancient glands are persistently present through the veins and arteries that are manifest in the location of the cap forward and it is verified that this is excessive fluidity, then cauterize that point with the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water collection in the glands, and place the cautery in the middle of the cap and two cautery points in the neck behind two temples, and two cautery points in the neck behind two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If necessary for addition, then cauterize that on the entire length of the cape's tail over the tip of the forehead with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the cauterization of bad breath.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that person whom we mentioned in the division and have not yet completed your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient three nuts; and remove their head, and cauterize it with a larger or smaller cautery of olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a thorn on two cautery over the two foreheads below the hair, a little.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And watch out for the arc that you do not burn that one.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And of the thorn cautery this is the form.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cauterization of the eyelids of the horses.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the horse is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery of this form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, with a small pointed cautery, make points on the two temples, and lengthen them in every part, then you should do this.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the temple.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand too hard against the cautery, but according to the amount that the upper eyelid is stuck together.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cautery of the upper eyelid when the eyebrows are converted into parts and pinch the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the eyebrows are converted into parts and pinch the eye, cautery in those places according to two methods, either by fire or by medicine that burns.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cautery with fire, command the patient to lean their eyebrows over those that clean them, as if they were those that clean them; and if they pinch the eye, then strengthen the eyelids of that with one band so that it does not become swollen until the eyebrows are born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When they are born and grown up, then pause the patient's head on your thigh, and place your hand over their eyelids with a tent-like motion, according to the shape of a funnel of mercury, and start the tenting near the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place a soft cloth or moistened cotton on their eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then use the pointed cautery that has this shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize the shape that was placed, little by little, in winding motions, until the surface of the eyelid is completely burned, like a funnel of mercury, appearing entirely proper.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And to ensure the healing of the eye work is that you lift the eyelid of the eye, which should be already contracted and the hairs of the eye raised for the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and place the cloth on it until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then carefully cure that which has become infected within it to be healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if it returns through the pores to its original place and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another cut with the cautery over that area as you had done previously.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the pores are in the eyelid, then cauterize that which is raised to its original place and equalized so that the pores do not puncture the skin.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery should be used as follows: command the patient to open the pores and equalize them, and then make a shape of rolled paper or cloth like a spoon from a mirror.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take some hog's lard and live caustic, and mix those causes well, and make that into a paste so that it is not dispersed; and then spread that paste over the paper which is made like a spoon from a mirror, and place that on one side of the eyelid; and place the other side of the eyelid in a soft cloth, and the head of the patient should be elevated.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Pause the medicine over the patient and press it gently onto them until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, which is like a burning sensation.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And if the patient persists in feeling that burning sensation, then remove the medicine and place a cloth on the wound; and when the burning sensation ceases, return the medicine and wash the wound with clean water; and then consider whether the eyelid has already been lifted as it would be from a cut or an incision, because it is ready; and if not, return to the place where the medicine was applied and where it did not penetrate until your operation is equalized and is contrary to the wound.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place a compress over the wound and wait until the pus of the abscess is drained, and then cure that area with a poultice or another remedy until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to keep careful watch during your operation that the medicine does not fall out of the wound, and if the eyelid becomes soft and there is any cause for the hairs in the wound, then repeat your medicine on that spot where the eyelid becomes soft, as you did at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of the herb called mirt.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the bones of men are varied according to their size and strength, and therefore your contraction should be made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the correct path to those who study this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the bone.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula of this kind, do not follow the method we have described in the divisions of diseases, but rather cauterize it in this way: command the patient to place their head on your knee, and hold their head between your hands in such a way that it is neither too tight nor too loose.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a cotton pad soaked in wine or a mixture of wormwood on the bone of their head.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cauterizing instrument, which has this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be concave, like the form of a spoon or pen knife, at one end of which is made the cautery.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you see, it should enter into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to come out with the needle.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But it is better to leave that which is concave as it is, or work according to the art.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and drain out the pus and dry it out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and remove the putrid matter from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place your hand over the cautery which is burning hot, and take away that little cautery from the side of the nose, so that it does not touch your hand or the patient's body, and then place the cautery on the gray matter of the nose and corrupt that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of the work, the cautery goes through to the bone, it is well; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and leave that there for three days, and then place your hand over that part which is covered with a dry cloth until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it has been passing through for several days and is not healed, then pause over the sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is revealed and then scrape it according to what is appropriate in its own chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula that was first described as follows: go to the location of the fistula and make a hole in it, and then place your hand on that cavity with a subtle shape; and put in the amount of one drop of plumbum fundut; and hold your hand well for retention, and do not let the patient be burned by the plumbum fundut so that it does not reach the bottom of the fistula; and cover the bottom of the fistula with album of honey or water, which plumbum adheres to and heals the fistula wondrously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed by the method we have mentioned for cauterization and cure, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a nose douche and reduce the fistula to the nose body when it comes to its own location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cautery of the hollow in the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Vesicles often cause tears in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you heal those tears with the cautery we have mentioned in the divisions and do not extend your cure, then ignite the small cautery according to this form that arises:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And the hollow of it is according to the thickness of the spoon.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that needle carefully in those tears until the cautery reaches the point of the tears.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it with the cautery until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the uvula or on the palate or on the teeth, an abscess occurs and you apply a poultice, and it bursts, and it becomes old, and boil and it forms a fistula, and then you heal it and do not extend your cure, then you should ignite the cautery according to the amount that is received in the fistula, and then put that ignited in the mouth, and your hand into the throat until the hot iron reaches the front of it, and at the back of it make a blister or two; and then heal it with the cautery we have mentioned for the cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the bone is fractured and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and treat the broken bone as it appears in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of the cautery of teeth and the softening of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and those remedies do not cure them, then place the patient's head in your lap, and shape the cauterizing instrument according to its form, which will be used, and hold it slightly above the tooth and insert it into that place while the patient feels the heat of the fire at the tip of the tooth until the remedy is absorbed.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and repeat the cauterizing instrument several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient closes their mouth with salt water and holds it for an hour, and this can be done because the decayed tooth is closed, the softened gums are strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cautery for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or if there is frost or worms in it, and the cure cannot be done with medicine, then cautery is used in two ways: with a heifer's horn or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with a heifer's horn is to take a horn of a cow and blow into it, and then take a cotton cloth and wrap it around the end of the tent, and then insert the horn blown into the tooth that hurts quickly before it freezes.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, immerse wool or cotton in the horn above that, and place that on the hurting tooth, and place that on the burning iron until the iron reaches the beginning of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But cautery with fire is to wait until the candle or iron is ready, and if there is any impurity in it and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then approach the cautery with the shape it will have, and place that over the tooth and your hand inside to prevent the cautery from being broken; and do some movements so that the pain remains or on that day or on another day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And cover that the patient opens his own mouth with good border and holds that for an hour and then remove it; this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as you wish your extremity according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cauterization of extremities.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When the extremities are weak and affected by humors and not obedient to digestion due to medicines and you wish to make them obey again, then approach the cautery with the shape it will have, having two extremities ready so that the smoke of the cautery can be applied to the other extremity, and place that ignited over that abscess a movement, and if necessary of that, until it reaches the center of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, then pause the cauterization according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it for three days and place it on the side in a bandage soaked in boiling water until it has been completely burned by the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that wound and dress it with bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the needle or pointed cautery in such cases is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of the cauterization of warts on the feet and the contraction of hares.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes onto the surface of the lung, especially when it is accompanied by complications, then it is necessary to evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medications, and then cauterize that place on the location where the lung is compressed.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to touch the cauterization on the lung or burn the lining of the lung, but a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that place with another pointed cautery at the joint of the neck on the back spine of the lung.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The pointed cautery should be held in the same way as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then, take care of that thing which was previously put inside until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cautery for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, and the patient does not have a fever or tuberculosis, but rather an old illness, then cautery is applied to that thing with two cauteries on the furcula in the places where the ribs meet the sternum; and another cautery in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and the pointed cautery should be held as before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, your cautery should be pointed with the cauteries called puncta, in the form that was previously described in the punctation of heel pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And insert the points into those; and then take care of that thing which was previously put inside until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And if the cautery has three points, which is common for cauterization, you can make three cauteries in this way:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	About the cauterization of the nipples, which is a helpful remedy.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the location of the remedy is displaced due to excessive lubrication and cannot be stopped at its return time, it should be returned before it returns to that usual position, and with a small movement it can be moved as we have proven, therefore first reduce the displacement, and then turn the patient on their back or on their side; and raise the chin, which is in the part of the nipple to the parts above and below.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the cautery has two points, this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And if you cauterize the chin before it enters the other side; and then the figure of cauterization will be as follows from four cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is according to the amount of tension; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Some cauteries are adjusted according to this count and because they are eight in number.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place your hand over the cauterized area and help the patient to relax, and the member should not be discomforted for any time until it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is at the parts above and below, then make that, and if the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is cold and moisture in the stomach that comes out of its composition and multiplies in it, and if you continue the methods of cure and do not confirm it, then cover the patient with two blankets, and extend his arms and things, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cauterized on the chest for the amount of one cauterized clavilh, and two cauterized on the sides of the cauteri, forming a triangular figure; and lengthen those that are not adjusted to make them equal.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery corresponds to the thickness of the two skin folds of the neck's crease.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if the shape of the cautery is like this, then add it. And if you want to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cautery in the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach is cauterized at the point where this cautery frightens, then place your hand over the stomach according to the amount you want to test, and then cauterize that point with this cautery; and then care for that point with the healing that precedes it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cauterization of the throat.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the throat due to cold or moisture or heavy breathing before the normal complexity of its condition is disrupted by excessive exit, then place the patient on his back, and do not compare it with what we have said, but rather place three cautery points according to this form and this amount between the shoulders, which is the position of a man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the greatest width of the said, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Do not touch the patient with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of water that is adhered to the quantity of the upper part of the spine is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet, then lift the lower parts of the body and raise the arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a pointed cautery, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the spine be adhered to the whole body so that it can reach into the intestines, as the spine here is thin; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of piercing of abscess in the foot with a pointed cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When the swelling or abscess in the thigh occurs and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the thigh or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the thigh, the patient's weight and pain are increased.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the thigh, then the pain is often severe and has exhausted many doctors with its treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, turn the patient on their side; and then examine the location of the abscess, and then use a cautery that is shaped like a hook, the form of which was previously described on the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And then cauterize that and cautery until the entire wound is closed, until it reaches the bone, until it heals.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that until it is cured, like the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cautery except for the one that is prolonged in the art of medicine, and in which more bad outcomes have been known; but this has tried some time ago on this operation, however it is better to leave it alone and it is less harmful.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of gout.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauteries of the joints according to astrology are second to this method, and this is the one you should use from the long dry stick that is found, and it should be as thick as possible.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and place it on the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at that location which is between the continuity of the shoulder blade and the collarbone; and with two small cauteries placed next to each other, one declining slightly towards the part where the beard was located, and with two cauteries in that area which are declining between the fifth rib and the diaphragm, declining slightly towards the back parts; and with another cautery at the middle of the chest; and with three cauteries on the back parts; and with another cautery in that location which is between the two shoulder blades, and with two cauteries on the sides of the chest, next to the cautery that is between the two shoulder blades.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not hold your hand near the pointed cautery, but rather in the palm of your hand.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And it has been said that ancient healers used pointed cauteries similar to fire and iron, and they placed them in the location between the ribs, until they reached the pustule and removed the bad blood, as we have mentioned in the pustule of the finger.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this perforation, the pointed cautery should not be used, as it has often caused harm in the location of the fistula that does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the tongue.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the tongue with what we have said about treatment in the division and do not compare your treatment, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are correct, one of which is to make three or four cauterizations along the length of the tongue according to the figure of the cauteries of the finger, whose figure has been mentioned.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And each cautery should have the width of a finger or slightly more, and the handle of the cautery should be the same handle as in the finger cautery equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not place your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery with two flames, which causes the phenomenon we have mentioned in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the ligament that is at the end of the tendon, which holds the joint of the patient's left leg.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be the one that lifts the ligament according to the length of the body, so that the points can be made at the appropriate latitude.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then introduce the two flames, light one, in the moment when those penetrate the ligament of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus four points have been made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you see, cauterize with the cautery having three flames.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you should cure the pointed cautery that has been left in for too many days, as it is more likely to cause complications than the other previous causes of treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cauterization of hydrocele.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries are not used in hydrocele but in the scrotum itself.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you are treating hydrocele, follow the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment with theirs, but rather use four cauteries around the umbilicus, one cauterizing over the stomach, another over the chest, another over the belly, and another two between the ribs on the back, and one cauterizing in the right side of the chest, and another over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the size of the wound.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cauteries in place for as long as possible.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not cure the patient too quickly with that pointed cautery which heals by causing the two opposite forces to be united to him, and it should be applied gradually with help from the healing process.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the pointed cautery that is cauterized on the abdomen should be like a clavichord according to the form mentioned above, and the one that is cauterized on the two sides should be like an olive according to its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cauterization of the feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are filled with water and sitrina, it is said that you should cauterize the feet on the inside of the ankle, between the ear and the annular bone, and raise your hand above the cautery and do not twist it; then raise your hand again, and do not return to that position, because the sitrina water will evaporate.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	And the cautery should be shaped like this: And then make two cautery points on each thigh, and in each thigh, make a cautery at the end of the cautery blade.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be of the length of the cushion: and the first one on the top, the other at the bottom of the cushion; and over each cushion two cautery points.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time so that some of its pus can drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then take care of those causes that we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of the cauterization of womb.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the womb is affected by cold and humidity that enter through weaknesses, then the digestive and retentive virtues are lost, which are in the stomach and intestines, and these are cured with those methods of treatment and not confined, and sometimes the patient suffers from cauterization of virtue showing, therefore cauterize that with a large cauterization on their stomach according to what was previously done in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauterization of the circle and with four cauterizations around the subtle umbilicus, with the subtle clavilh cauterization; and with the cauterization over the alcatin on aloes large, or with two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If you see the excessive humidity and the patient is tolerating it, then cauterize that above the perineum and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the groins, as this cure significantly improves the condition.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient ulcers.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are ulcers in their nature or one of thick humors that have been infiltrated, and they are cured by the method we have mentioned in the division, do not compare it to the other cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the belly button and two on the abdomen.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it is decided that the stomach of the patient is infiltrated and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is swollen, then cauterize that above the stomach with a large cauteri as mentioned earlier; and with one cauteri on the forehead, and with another cauteri on the cheek of the patient with a clavilh, and leave the cauteri for some time under, and cure the patient inside before they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Regarding the cauterization of the kidneys near their abscesses.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the kidneys, use a cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then place that burning cautery in the removed kidney, and wait until it reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, if they are too much, then cauterize each one after you have returned them, and care for those who receive that which is given to them from the tinctures until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on anything, it is better to use it sparingly.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Regarding the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in nature between their parts.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not comply with the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by that, then heal with cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When there is an old fistula in the natural back, and it is filled with pus and corrupt humors, then that which is pushed through it should be thin and subtle, and you should know the depth of it from the front.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then use a cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then put that cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you inserted the tent.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat over that with the cautery until those corrupted bodies are burned away in one or two or three days, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful of the burning of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the core of the bladder or the core of the intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not do that unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place where it was cured.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and the matters are removed from it, and they remain there for a long time, then you will know that it is completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the materials are not from that place, then know that it is penetrating or corrupting the bones, or that is one of those causes from which remembrance will come in its location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37:
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of the ears.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there is pain in the ears from cold or from thick wind, and the patient's mouth is closed, then cautiously apply a pointed cautery to each ear, using a sharp needle for cauterization.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And if you cauterize too much, then wait a short time before applying the second one, so that three lines of cauterization will come, and they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38:
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When an injury occurs in the bladder due to cold and moisture, and the patient cannot hold urine, then apply a pointed cautery to the middle part of the bladder, using the needle as if it were a pen, and cauterize with one pointed cautery in the center and another on the side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the thickness of the foot; and cauterize that pointed cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And use the hammer according to what is appropriate.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cauterization of the groin.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is a bruise and moisture in the groin, and it is forbidden to press on it, and the menstruation is corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and they suffer from pain due to their presence, then it is recommended that this area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a pointed cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries, and use the hammer.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture accumulates in the joint of the elbow, and it is caused by the inflammation of its area, and it is stretched out over the other when they are compared with each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is in the place where it hurts.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then apply the pointed cautery to the part of the body where it hurts, similar to how you would use a tent in the circumference of the part, and so that the part falls into the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the pointed cautery be in the form of the stomach cautery.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this pointed cautery is not available to you, then use three pointed cautery tools made of large olive wood.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be done according to the thickness of the entire wound; and take care of it until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cautery of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain is felt in the part of the body, and its cause is that it is wet and humid, the patient is cured with what we have said before, and does not compare it, which is antiquated. Then cover the patient with cloths soaked in heavy humors, either with foul-smelling or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the cautery in that case has two handles: one for medical use and one for fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	When the second handle is used, it is one that cauterizes that part of the ankle with three triangular points in this form; and make them deep enough.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery is the thickness of the same and if the cautery is olive oil or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes several crevices are made on the head of the ankle so that there are four cautery points.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want to, cauterize with the circle that precedes the form in the treatment of ankle dislocation, and let it contain and burn the entire tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the method of cautery in such cases when pain adheres to the ankle and does not extend into the space.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it extends into the space, then cauterize that part with two cautery points on the space over the area where the patient feels the pain; and one cautery on the calf for four days on the left side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the pointed cautery, and the depth of the cautery according to the thickness of the nail.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient complains that the pain is spreading to the area around the foot, then cauterize that area with three or four points or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient complains that the pain is behind the foot on the cushion, then cauterize that area with a pointed cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful during cauterization that the cautery does not burn the nerves or cause great swelling, and that for that reason it causes pain to the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen many of those who cauterize on the scalp and burn in the cauterization, and the bed on fire inflated before the swelling is achieved, and fire pierces and corrupts the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then that death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts together, then cauterize each one in this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise men in the cauterization of any cautery say: make it similar to a circle of iron, the circumference of which is the width of one palm; and its orifice according to the thickness of a finger bone or about a few centimeters.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let that circle be another third; and let the spaces between them be equal to the width of your little finger; and those circles should be placed in two parts; and let the length of those iron strips be one or two fingers, and make them evenly arranged in the circles; and this is the shape of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then let it be heated in the fire until it begins to curl and sparkle, and then place it on the surface of the affected area, the patient lying on their back.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize it with three cautery irons in a row.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice to that area and cover the wound for several days; and then care for that area with ointment until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Oh, my sons, we have not used this kind of cautery for this part because of the fear of its appearance, and because we have found some that seem to be over it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	The best cautery for this part is the one that has caused less suffering in it.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	The best cautery is the one that you make by making two circles with a needle-perforated skin in which the tongue of the iron door is placed; its length should be equal to the width of their nose, those two nuts or those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between them is equal to the thickness of the said part; and it is placed under and over, and it contains something between them in this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand over the part of the patient's body where they are lying, and take some water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be like a small fire, and you should do that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient from biting and adhesion of it — because that biting is like from fire — until the biting stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and remove all the water from the back of the water bottle.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave it for three days and place it over the edge where the black spot of the abscess remains, and leave it there for several days, and then drain it; this is considered a remedy.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that with water until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the thigh or chest, make it in the same way as the water bottle is made.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of the water bottle, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and unextinguished fire from the ashes of one part, and distill it in a new oil bath of which the old one has been perforated by a small tube according to the amount that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of the oil bath in another distilled oil bath, and boil over that alkali and live fire from two drops of water which takes those by a certain amount, and put it on your hand for good compression, and leave the oil bath that issues from the ashes into the distilled oil bath.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all of that water, and pour it over another living cause and another renewed alkali, because that water is very strong and is administered in certain medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, because that operation is like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines that are cauterized with them, such as thistle and honey, are mixed with something that is not known.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Guillaume reported from an ancient man about the operation and cure that is cured pain in the water and sciatica vein, and magnified much of that, and said that no other cure was needed, and because it is healed by a method such as recommendation, because very soon after that, he knew that of that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be near certain fresh herbs, and if not fresh herbs, then take recent fig leaves; and the powder should be made from a small amount of gray and placed on the water in which the pain is, or on the cushion, or on the bed, and let it lie.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And leave it for the amount of three hours or for as long as the patient can bear the discomfort.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place that on the floor and when the body of the patient is coiled, insert that into the ground, where the pain ceases and it is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that no one should use this cautery for these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May it be known that when a goat's wound is made in the vein that stretches, it should be cauterized with a lancet; and the cautery is made like this: take wool and dip it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the heel.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dry wound of a goat and apply it to that with fire until it is made into charcoal; and place it on the wool and leave it until it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat that, and do not stop doing that until the sensation of the biting pain reaches the whole body and the pain is relieved.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cauterization is called a cattle cauterizer.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the cauterization of pain in two.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain in the legs is caused by various reasons, such as pressure or impact or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, by the infusion of wet and damp matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization is not used in this single species, which is made by the outflow of damp matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, after evacuation of the patient's body, apply fetid and similar pills to them, which are made on both legs in which the pain is three lines wide, more than that, according to the amount of tolerance of the patient and the effectiveness of it.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And this cauterization is made with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries or with the middle clavilh in this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cautery at the beginning of gout.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Children are affected by this disease at a young age; and it is customarily said that it occurs on their structure in the spring, with elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And often at the lower back and on the neck of the patient, where it begins to overcome the other spondils.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see that and want to prevent it, then do so with this pointed cautery that is circular according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	which grasps the cautery over all part of the spine equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cautery in the circle of the spine with the pointed cautery two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And the points are placed between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then cure the place until it is healed by what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that cautery is not administered in gout that is caused by spasms of the nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the cautery for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And if gout is cured by the method of treatment and the pain does not subside, then use the cautery again.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you should apply the cautery to that area of the joint near the foot with a pointed cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of the cautery made from olive wood:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain spreads to other joints, and that does not subside, then use the cautery on each knuckle with three or four points from each part of this olive wood cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If you need to use other types of cautery that are necessary for this purpose, then apply them to the affected area, but do not press your hand too hard on the cautery before, only around the tip of the cautery.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If the pain extends to the groin and testicles, then apply the cautery mentioned in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is only in the testicles and is called epididymitis, then make points around the base of the penis as it twists, make points on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If the pain remains in the mentioned area, then make points around the base of each testicle and on the scrotum of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If the pain extends to other joints or muscles, then apply cautery to all parts of the helpers.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not discharge the patient from good care and reception of medicines, as if good care is given and feces are evacuated, this cautery will heal, God help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the cauterization of wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the wound is in the groin and the intestines are protruding through the abdominal wall, and if it is approached too quickly, then order the patient to lie on their side and use gentle caresses to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient's hand between their thighs and command them to hold it in place while the cauterization is being done or the intestine appears through the abdominal wall.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return the patient's hand to their side and carefully try to repair the rupture on the opposite side of the abdominal wall, making it similar to a circle at the upper part of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then remove the cauterizer in the following shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	while holding it with both hands and apply pressure.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And place your hand with the cauterizing instrument at the correct angle, and insert the cautery into the patient's penis through the middle of the glans; and repeat that other movement if you have not succeeded in the first movement in the penis.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe the position of the intestine during your cauterization, so as not to burn it, as that could cause death or other great harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you have the cautery, do not press the bones, and do not complete your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And know that the cautery for children should be thin according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And care for the location of the cautery for three days until the scab from the fire has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then carefully cure those other wounds before they become infected.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should remain on their back for 40 days until the wound is sealed and the infection has passed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And cover the food that you give to the patient according to the length of time of their treatment, which should be placed on their belly, and prevent the intestine from coming out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to get up after 40 days, then administer appropriate medication, and keep that for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And be careful of hard work, eating, drinking, and violent movements, because when using this regimen of healing, the entire body will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And if you direct the cure of the ruptures in other parts of the body, and at the beginning, and you want them not to regrow, then cauterize the rupture with a red-hot iron according to the amount of it, and that which is extracted from the codena should be like the clean part of it; and then cure that which we have said, and do not adjust it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And then the first doctor said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery of this form, rather than with a needle.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And another line is placed on the side opposite the rupture, and another line above; and your hand holds a clavilh cautery, but the first cautery is thinner and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of the cauterization of torticollis.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in other members due to blows or impact, and persists for a long time and does not improve with medical treatment, it is customarily called torticollis and should be cauterized with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the size and shape of the cautery should be according to the magnitude and duration of the member, its virtue and development, and the location of the torticollis and pain of the member.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If it is healed by the first cautery, then it is good; otherwise, repeat the process on that member; because of the custom of those pains, they are points in the member that approach the other member, so that you can obtain them with the cautery before the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	About the cautery for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers are sometimes cauterized with a pointed cautery for great relief, and if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of the muscles and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Therefore, when you want to cauterize that one, consider whether the leprosy is contagious and if it has been cured with the method we have mentioned in the division and do not give, and be careful about the patient that the corruption comprehends all of his body and all of his appearance, then cauterize that one on the head as follows: with a point in the middle of the head, and with the second point behind it, turning the face to the end of the hair; and with others on two ears; and with another behind, on the back or nape.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, your hand should be placed inside the bone a little before the first prick, and from there the scars are displaced, so that the expiration of large vapors is alleviated from it; and cauterize on the flesh according to what is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then you should cauterize those parts with the cautery we have mentioned in the chapter; and cauterize over the tip of the nose, and two cautery on both cheeks, and two on both collarbones, and two on the spine, and one large one near the spine, and one on the back, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the patient's feet; and cauterize all the joints of the mentioned limbs and feet, and on each toe of their feet, and on the soles of their feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that are on the sole of the foot, do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some wounds are cauterized with one cautery on the teeth of the lower jaw and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the cheek.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you will know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and you will know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as with the other parts, so that the body of the patient has already been stupefied.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And you should know that the cautery sizes are large or small according to the members and joints as indicated by the tools of the specialties.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the cautery with flour mixed with honey and the other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of cautery for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but is not healed, then you should cauterize that numb member with a cautery according to the size of the member or its part.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And the cautery should enter the skin just a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with the other remedies until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes the veins in the arms are cauterized to alleviate pain in the hands and feet, and the spine of the back and the muscles that move that member, and it is remembered the cure.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not cauterize that one unless it is known from the anatomy of the member and the exit of all the nerves that move the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	About the cauterization of a wound that is infected.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When a wound is old and does not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then cauterize it with a pointed cautery in a small amount according to the quantity of the species of the codeine until it is remembered the whiteness and the color of the wound, and the color of the wound is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a poultice made of flour and lentils with rose oil and leaves of arnagle, and of goose or duck feathers, each one is a part and all are mixed, and then apply a cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the cauterization of the neck.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When a tumor begins to grow and you want to cut it out, then cauterize that round cautery in its circle around it as it is turned.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And they say that it should be cauterized with the other cautery in the middle place; but I have not seen that, because I fear that it will become an ulcer, and I have already seen that sometimes.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to be cauterized in its circle around it as we have said, or with a pointed cautery.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 10.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cauterization of the adventitia.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adventitia is late in maturation, and it is because of excess or because of the patient's age, which is old and weak, or because of time, and you want to speed up its maturation; then cauterize around it with a pointed cautery, and place a plaster on it to speed up its maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to make a puncture with the pointed cautery, then hold it like this: and pause it in the middle of your finger where the needle enters.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is left in that place where it has been placed, so that the body of the arm can be relieved; and then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	About the cauterization of corrosive substances.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosive substances are corrupting agents that move in the body, which corrodes those who have it like fire eating dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see that corrosive substance in the place where it is suffering from fire cautery, then hold it with a few small clavils and large ones according to what is appropriate in the place where it is corrupting.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize it from all parts until you eliminate all the corruption and there is no cause left of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let it rest for three days, and place on the cauterized places some mixed oil inside until all the scars are gone and all the corruption is eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then carefully remove those pus-filled abscesses.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If after three days the flesh has grown healthy where there is no corruption, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on that which remains in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And if some acute medical remedies are available, it is better to use them instead of a cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, the cautery of fire is more useful for purging pus.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already told the cure of it with acute medical remedies in the division, and so take that which will be needed from it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 44
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cauterization of clots and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Clots that are attached to the parts of the foot after the illness that is called gout, which causes great pain and swelling in the foot; and cautery is used in those places in two ways, either by fire or by a pointed cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	However, the cautery of fire is that you ignite the pointed cautery in a similar way to a pen with a quill, which should be made of iron according to the amount that contains the clot from all parts, and also of thin metal.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that fire above the nail, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it for three days until it starts to move.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply that poultice made from wild marjoram leaves mixed with salt, and leave it on for one hour until the pain is eliminated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the wound with fresh meat juice until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it does not convert, and if there are wounds on the surface of the body, especially in the thighs and feet, then you should administer in those cautery with water, and take a syringe of iron or iron pen, and place that on the nail; and then slowly inject a small amount of water into the syringe, and rotate your hand with the compression of your hand from all sides, and press the margin of the syringe at the root of the nail, and find the water cauda reaching the base of the nail; and wait for the patient one hour for the bite of the water cauda, and then remove that, because the nail has its roots healed.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And if they were to come over all of them, it would be necessary to bring the other one in as well.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then care for those who have been bitten by the teeth of dogs, which cause the flesh to rot.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 45
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of the cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When someone has trembling due to a fracture in the nerves or fever caused by an illness, or for some similar reason, it is customary to cauterize with four cautery irons or one hot one on the spinal bones of the back, between each spine put one cautery; and on their chest, and over their stomach, place an olive oil cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of the patient stops and the healing of the illness is accelerated.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 51
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of the cautery for accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are abscesses in the body, and they cause wounds that are made of thick, corrupt matter; then at the beginning, as it appears, it is customary to cauterize over all of the pustule with a thin cautery iron, the end of which is extended to the fire; or with a long needle of iron; or with a round cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes, during the beginning of their explusion according to this method; and not believing in it, they disrupt the excessive practices done by those, and cure them of those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But first, you should perform evacuation with a trocar.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 66.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of the cauterization of flesh wounds caused by stabbing with a dagger.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many people are stabbed with daggers in the area that causes deformed scars, or in the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similarly, it is difficult to remain the same.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when such accidents happen to anyone, you should immediately place your hand on the wound of the dagger, and press over that spot where the newly wounded people enter that flux of blood from the wound before it comes out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place the burning oil and large ones, by many names, and blow on those until they are extinguished.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then approach the second location and the affected area where the artery is torn, over that vein quickly enough so that it doesn't bleed again, and insert the cautery into it and restrict that wound.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the wound is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove the cautery and extend it, then take another cautery consistently from the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and do not cease to do so until the wound is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that another evil comes upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the wound in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, then one of four ways: either with a cautery as mentioned above, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when the extremities are burned, the wound is restricted and the blood flows; or it should be tied with a strong thread or a bandage for its strength, or it should be placed on medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the wound; and they should be strengthened with a cushion or a constriction device.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May the one who administers a proper restriction of fire and air, and a tight structure of cloth or by positioning causes and similar, not comfort but rather torture.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	May that one who has this and is not the doctor or medicine, open the indicated pause on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand the great cost of entering that part of the plague, and over the archer it should not remain; and over the archer, aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat until that sanctum is congealed and swollen; and may it be covered in what is necessary for cauterization or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and bleeding and of phlebotomy and of plagues and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that all maladies in which cauterization with fire and medicine is convenient, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and the forms of the cauteries; and we have ordered the chapters of the subranean part from the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	I will proceed in this chapter for that method, so that it may be helpful to those who seek that, regarding what has been asked about it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And since I have begun that, child, you should know that in this chapter is contained what was written in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for that which is in this chapter, child, you should know that in the operation which is in this chapter, the removal of pus is done with great caution, and it is done by aspiration of the vein or incision on the abscess or extraction of the cause of the plague or excision of a stone and its like.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the worst of them is death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is uncertainty, because some operations require the hands of men, which are not suitable for unhealthy people.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of them will lead you to your unhealthy condition and will be death for you, and you will suffer from the violence of that which comes from your unhealthy condition, and from the long duration of that unhealthy condition, and because of that fear, which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those who give you such advice, you should listen to them and hope for their healing, as their illness is dangerous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not accept anything from someone who approaches you in this way; your caution should be greater than your gullibility, and do not presume any cause without first obtaining certain scientific evidence that verifies this for you, and to which successful results are attributed.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your diseases the prediction and indication of which is converted to healing, for in that case you are helped by acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, may God grant you his understanding and not lead you astray and protect you, for that is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters following the second chapter on cauteries, of the cure of the head between the feet, so that it may be helpful to you in what is asked of you and for which you have a need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	About the cure of gout, which is contained in the heads of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You should know that this disease is caused in children by the womb and when the newborn's head is born, it becomes inflamed.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some are caused by an unknown cause.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have never seen this disease except in children; and to all those whom I have seen, it was accompanied by death, and for this reason, I have left work in those.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head whose head was completely full of gout, and the head of which was always magnificent until it could not be met with the greatness of its own head, and more than the humidity increased until the fire died.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is added between the bones and the cartilage, or it is added behind the bone on the socket.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	If the humidity is between the cartilage and the bone and the abscess is small, then you should cut in the middle of the child's head through a fissure in the latitude, and the length of the fissure should be two nights until the humidity runs out, and this is the shape of the spoon:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the humidity is increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is below the bone, then you should expose all the corners of the head and pour water into them when you understand that the wound is clean and not to your liking.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	So that you make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And remove all the moisture from the incision; and apply strength to the incisions with cloth and feathers; and apply hot water over it for five days, and remove the scab and cure the wound with tests and ointments, and strengthen the head to equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of water, where some times it is in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and then pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the collection of water, and do what is best possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not sever the artery and engage in bloodletting, as this may cause the patient to become weak and die due to loss of fluid.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	About the incision of the arteries that are close to the temples, called hilassesse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter 2.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When a catarrh or rash occurs on the thighs or chest, and this is treated, and it is not cured by medication, then this cure is achieved by incising those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to incise those arteries that are located at the top of the head, and the location is wiped with a rough cloth so that the veins appear, and the collar of the patient is strengthened with a cloth; and consider where the vein is placed; and the locations of each one on the locations that are close to the temples, and they are only visible in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And therefore, when you want to pierce the vein, and incise each one at the tip of each part, entering into the bone, and this is done by the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the spatula under the artery and squeeze it onto the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if the length of the incision is too short, then when a vein is incised, the blood flows out with a pulsating beat, which should be stopped frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the arch does not appear at the edge, then measure the amount of gold from the aureola that is equal to three fingers, and then insert it, and penetrate into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which is taken from the blood is an amount of one uncia, and if it is not strong enough to move more or less, then all of this depends on the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the replacement of the arch of the bone.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the cause, and if there is any reason for the phimosis, then incise it in order to prevent abscess formation.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the cause with plasters and bandages of linen, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of stones that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an ancient or new injury occurs, due to humoral imbalances and the quality of the tendons in the temples, or due to vehement old age and similar conditions, and it is treated with methods of healing in medicine and does not improve, we have shown in these ailments extraction of stones from the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises his fingers; and understands the stone that is in the temple where it is shown by its side, and it is hidden only in a few people due to vehemence of the fracture.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and then fracture the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the stone appears to you clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And here is the form of the spatula that you will take:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then approach the catheter that is inside you with ease until you reach the urethra; and then insert it into the opening and extract any excess urine from the surroundings until you remove the catheter from the urethra and discover the opening of the tunics which are left there, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the catheter at its tip, and then incise one part according to the quantity by which the ends of it were stretched and contracted, and do not let any blood flow out, because if it is not incised, the blood will not be able to flow out at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate about one unit of blood within three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the urethra is large, then fold it in two places with strong double thread or cord at its length, and do not leave it to putrefaction during the consolidation of the wound and let blood flow out.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then, approach the excess skin that is between two folds; and do this at that hour or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize that pointed cautery into the bone, and it will stay in place of that metatarsal work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or is in a scalded condition; because cautery is of those causes that help to end the moisture, and therefore it is better in healing.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover the extraction of the ribs that have collapsed in the old wound, and place them on the cleanly made powders, and then apply dry medicines to heal the flesh and wet dressings until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And while you work another venture until the end of the discharge of pus from the rib, then you should tighten that pus, or the cautery, or what fills the wound, and strengthen your hand until it is tightened the pus.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If for any reason you cannot perform that action, then pause your hand over the location where the swelling is congealed, and apply cold water to the area with great freezing intensity until the inflammation subsides, and strengthen it according to the comfort of the patient.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And this is more suitable for extracting arrows from the body, as you cauterize the vein with this cauterizer having two points, since you have properly located both locations and paused where necessary, until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that the part between the extremities of the arrow is not completely solidified by this cauterizer.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cauterizer:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two points should be exemplary.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the sharpness of two points is not exemplary, then it is better to use one pointed tool, because if the points are too sharp, they may pierce the flesh at high speed and cause damage.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is some swelling in those places, apply heat to them and the flesh is removed more easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all works and more useful.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between two wounds, the amount of swelling in the said.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Fourth.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure of bodies with sharp and acidic ulcers on the skin.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acidic ulcers are on the body and the skin over the crown of the head, and there is no cause for the cure of medicine in that area, and the face of the patient becomes wrinkled and feels pain in their forehead as if they were walking ants, and the wounds of that person are extended, humid and not covered with fur, and the scales on their skin are scratched by the acidity of their tears, the ancient remedies in the cure of those of this operation, and name that cure am spassa.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to raise their arms, which are on their chest, and then insert three equal fissures along the length of the chest.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure is two times: the first fissure should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the chest, and the second along the length of a little movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And guard yourself from the beginning of the arches which are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of the other jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each insertion is three times the quantity, adjust it accordingly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge or dry cloth at hand, use it to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then place the blunt end of two sharp ends, of which this is the shape of the insertion of it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part of the temples into the second insertion.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise the entire tendon that is between two incisions on the bone, and then move it from one incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then place your foot in this space and insert the first instrument, which is called a chisel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp side of that instrument on the flesh attached to the tendon, and the dull side on the bone, and push it until it reaches the incision, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Make sure that the incision continues at this point on the tendon, and then move it into the second incision.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when an equal amount has been moved, express the places of the tendons that are swollen with a congealed substance.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place a piece of old cloth on each incision, and place the powders that are used to treat wounds and heal them quickly, and make sure they do not become an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, you should remove the bandage and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and then care for that area with a basilicon cream or rose oil and other ointments until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	About the cure of gout and its descents from the parts derived from the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When any person has frequent attacks of gout and its descents, and sometimes the wounds of the patient become small, and their eyes are weakened, and they have ulcers on their eyelids, and in the front of the head there is sharp pain and extreme weakness, then you should know that these accidents occur because the matters and gout come only from the veins derived from the parts of the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: you should order the patient to raise their head, and then insert a small incision at the middle of the forehead, a little to the left (and begin the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; and it should be incised through the bone; and extend your hand through the temples which are moist due to mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry the entire wound with a dry cloth or dry cloths and then fill between the two labia of the old man's crotch or with the cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply powder and oil to prevent suppuration.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove that and see that the abscess has begun to decrease, then apply honey that flows from the nose of the flesh, and use that drying regimen which is made from wheat flour two parts and collofania four parts and mix it, and from there make a poultice and administer it to these wounds as if you were taking it from the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment of that which is in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All the causes that are in the ears are one of four species, either it is a mineral stone or a cause similar to a stone, such as iron and copper, or it is a plant cause, such as beans, or it is a fluid cause, such as water and vinegar and other similar things, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when the pain in the ear or another similar cause to those causes that do not adjust or believe in the ear, and pause the ear to the sunlight, and if you see the pain, then distill some oil of garlic or wormwood into that cause, and administer the extraction of it, and make the sneezing condition, and open the nose for the event of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some cloths or wool around the ear at certain parts, and extend the ear to the parts above, which are often forgotten in these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not forgotten, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called the epicicloic subtle gastroscope, which has this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten with the instrument, then good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with the small double needle.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not forgotten by that, then make a needle of aram and insert the end of the needle into the ear tract and close around the needle with wax and softened oil so that it is not pushed out except the needle.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then carefully extract the sharp thorn that has deeply penetrated, as we have mentioned before.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	However, if it is not removed in this manner, then take a piece of bread or a clean cloth, which is taken by the hands in a small amount, and place it at the end of the wound, and cover it properly placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the opening of the ear canal to facilitate it, and then remove the earwax from the moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not removed in all the causes that we have mentioned, then you should cut that part where an abscess or spasm may occur.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cut that is that you first bandage the patient's vein of the sephasic and remove it according to the method of its virtue, and then make that cavity between your fingers and convert the earwax to the parts above, and do a small incision in the ridge of the ear where the grease of the ear is located.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the lunar-shaped crack reaches the bone, and the bone is found, use appropriate instruments; then quickly close that crack at that time, and cure it before it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause is in the ankle and it is one of the large bones that I believe and which are inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not obey my advice, then take a thin spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and apply it to the abscess that has fallen into the ankle.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do that when you think that the abscess has already been moistened by the vapor of the ankle, and pause it in small movements, and extract it with forceps or fine instruments, or at the beginning have some of this here mentioned, which is praised for the extraction of it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that enters the ankle cavity, let the patient use a sneezing powder at the beginning, and fill the entire ankle with old cloth, and put it on the ankle where the water is, and if by that it is expelled, good; and if not, then later take some thin iron rods and lion's teeth according to the length of this, and calk those in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of those in the opening of his ankle and strike one with another iron rod on the iron rod that is inside the ankle.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not stop this procedure until all the water is drained out.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water is drained out, you take a piece of paper or cloth and place one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until it burns the most of it.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put another cloth and do this many times until all the water is drained out, and discard that which was used with the cannula as mentioned above.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of beasts entering that ear, if it is a small thing, use the same method and with a similar instrument, as we mentioned in the division; but if it is a large thing that causes pain to the side of the brain, then administer the extraction of it with great care and caution, and the cause of it is more difficult than all the other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of worms that generate in the ear, if you treat it with the same method and treatment as we mentioned in the division and distillations, and do not compare your treatment, then cover the ear with a bandage.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if here is any cause of worms, then extract that sharp or thin object, but if there is no cause, then take a narrow and wide-mouthed canula like this one:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And introduce the thin end of the canula into the ear, according to the amount that the patient can bear; and then suck out as much as possible with a strong suction, and do this repeatedly until all the worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if they do not obey you with the assistance, then open and close the circuit of the canula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have been extracted in the cure of worms, and look for this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your effusion is the one that you use to pour in the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, like this one:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or iron, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and place it on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it should be done as they are in the cavity of the continuous catheter here where it is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the end of the catheter decently, and then pour oil into the cavity of the auscultation, or some herb, or whatever liquid you want from these medicines in the catheter — and that is in the ear —, and then gently push the ray above and express the hand above to compress the temperature of the liquid until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the auscultation and the patient feels the oil entering.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is in the ear should have already been heated with a little fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause of what you will distill into the ear is not too cold, because the ear medicines cannot bear such a thing.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the cure of opacities in the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes wax accumulates in the ears of young children from the womb of their mothers, and this has also happened in some men, opacity in the middle of the ear due to plaque or no flesh in that area; and this opacity is sometimes made in the front part of the tragus of the ear which does not know the excretion, and sometimes in the parts before.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	When the first symptom occurs at the beginning of the disease, which is not understood, it is in the major difficulties of difficult treatment.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that case where you understand the symptom, cover the patient's head with a cloth and look at that.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an abnormal appearance, open the small sharp instrument of which this is the form of it:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it in which the width is small, one part is sharp and the other not; and the instrument is of two lion's teeth so that it does not touch the head.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the appearance is caused by flesh that has grown on the head or in the wound, then open several sharp needles and insert them into the wound before all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the appearance is at the beginning of the head, then take a sharp needle and burn that instrument a little, and place it in the wound of the head.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if the patient has difficulty breathing due to the weight of the body, the effort of lifting it increases their difficulty in breathing; and be careful not to compress the nerves of the neck.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place a cloth of the second quantity equal to the width of the trachea on the neck, which you have wrapped in an Egyptian bandage; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any and push it into the water and powder it over it according to three, and use it; and if you see that the neck is already infected, then remove the infected one and replace it with another one that you have wrapped in a cerot that is made with oiled rosin, until the abscess has healed; and cure it within that time.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If you have excessive bleeding from the wound, then submerge a cloth or cloth in cold water and place it on the neck, and use another remedy that stops the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the treatment of atezil, which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athezil, which sometimes occurs in the eyelids of the eyes due to some humidity, and sometimes due to dryness.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should hold those eyelids or eyes open, and cut those eyelashes from their roots, and place your hand over the areas according to the third method.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	However, if the pain is caused by cold humors flowing from the veins, then you should cauterize those areas with a pointed cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cauterization is to make incisions and remove moisture when the cause of the eyelids is still present; and when they are cauterized with fire, those eyelids are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Of the treatment of granulation, which occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Moisture occurs in the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause that is similar to granulation in its strength and hardness, and because it grows, it is called granulation.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And there is a collection of thick moisture under and above the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation in them is to consider if the great swelling comes from that which appears on the eyelid and is putrefied throughout; and the cause of this is unknown.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision over that part with the fissure, and scrape off all the putrefied matter within; and suspend it from there and cut off that part.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	However, if you are not equipped with the incision of this part and cannot put it through the eyelid, then in no case is that known.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and cure that within until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then you will not be harmed by that which remains for that part where the oil of this restores and encases.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is declining to the parts underneath the eyelid, then scrape off that part and suspend the swelling from there, another incision which you indicate, and press it throughout; and if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, then that is not known in any case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash the wounded area with salt water; and treat the area with what is inside that will make it heal.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the cure of axenrhine on the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axenrhine is a gray substance that is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and especially in children, aggravates wounds of those and causes them to lose their sight; and they cannot look at the clarity of the sun because tears gather on those.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you see them talking to their faces all the time, and on their sleeping faces; and they have swollen eyelids, which are already covered with inflammation, and imminent appearance of inflammation is in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you cause inflammation inside them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some method of operation is in that which the patient pauses his own head on the finger, and then place cloth from him and from the wound, and make a circle according to the amount that contains all parts, and then place that over that and press the fingers of all to be added to inflammation in the middle of the circle, and then put some space in the middle of that humidity with a spatula through the incision, and the incision should not be greater than the incision made in flaubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the first cavity that you open completely until you reach the arch, where in the most displaced processes, the arch is formed by a white-colored groove.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	So extract those cloths that you have wrapped between the thighs, called parts of the fornix, and rotate between your right and left hand until it is spread out.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to adjust in the groove so that the spatula does not reach the bone and the other side of it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If you do not see at your arch at the beginning of the groove, then adjust in the groove a small facilitating tool until you reach your arch; and then extract that which we have said; and soak cloths in vinegar and water, place them on the area and strengthen those woolen cloths.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so apply salt and place it in the cavity of the groove so that that which is removed from that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an abscess occurs in that location, then treat it with a cedar oil plaster until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of the methods of touching the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the edges of wounds are not adjusted by natural hairs and their surrounding tissue, then touching the wound itself can cause damage to the wound, which is called tactinir of the wound, and it can be cured in four ways: either with a pointed cauterizing iron; or with an acute medicine as described in the chapter on cauterizing; or by making a tacking and suture; or by using cannulas as I have described.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore cover that the head of the patient is in your left hand; then convert the eyelid to your left hand, and if it converts, good; otherwise, insert the needle in the part behind the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate above, and that is — near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are — near the hairs, and pull the thread above the eyelid, and convert it to the right.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then insert a needle in the part of the eyelid below the eyebrows, adjusting it to the lacrimal canal; and then extract the hair and place it behind the eyelid, dampening it with small pieces of cotton or cloth, and then apply pressure on the eyelid with a tent, and let it rest as if it were a fig leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it should be noted that the figure varies according to the amount of edema of the eyelid, as it is different in men, where some require a large incision in the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid becomes swollen.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then insert the needle above the two lines that have been sutured, and begin from the lacrimal canal to the lacrimal duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision near the natural hairs has the same size as the largest of the king's.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then insert the needle in one of the two corners of the eyelid, and then scrape off that entire area, and then adjust the stitch on both lips with a thin piece of silk or wool, and wipe away the pus, and make it adhere to any excess thread on two eyebrows, if you want to do that, otherwise, don't worry.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And after three or four days, approach the suture of the wounds and heal it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound open for a few days and heal it with that which dries and constricts, as the eyelid is raised by the sealing of the wound and its adhesion; however, the suture is better. And thus, I will now discuss the ancient methods.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in their concern for the patient, and it is a good operation, and not in fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in this, and it is that the finger figures as follows with the mirror, and then raise the eyelid three inches separately and bring them together according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	However, if it is not possible to do that, then hold the inches, and if it is not equal, take a needle with thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other wound towards the lacrimal major, and the second wound towards the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the called wounds at equality, and then raise your hand to the elevation of the equal, raise the entire eyelid over which it is best to be as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is inside so that it may be healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If an abscess occurs on your forehead or your forehead, cover that abscess with wax and the same ointment, and apply it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Sometimes eyelids are turned inside out, then cover that which you use for the forehead; but stitching in such places is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To bandage the legs follows this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	First, you turn the eyelid and cut the figure that is intended according to what I have said; then, using art, make two thin strips of cloth of such length as the length of the eyelid and the width of their middle part should be slightly less than the width of the sparrow.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already incised at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add each thin strip under that which superfluously covers the eyelid of the eye, and tightly stitch the strips of each part, leaving that one for several days, until the bandage dies and becomes denied and rots within a short time.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is too late, then break the tumor with a lancet, and then care for the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So when it is closed, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not prick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make cans that you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width, neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of raising the prickly hairs in the eyelid with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are unnatural hairs, hard, rough, and prickly, then the operation is as follows: you take a thin needle and place it in a thin, soft, and sharp cedar wood, and then adjust its extremities and tips in a way that is subtle.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the needles should be the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you make another thin needle from it in a short time, and use its tips if you want to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the patient's head on the pillow, and position it close to the sunlight so that your work can be clearly seen, as this is a delicate and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle into the eyelid at the point that requires stitching, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid until it comes out on the other side of the eyelid naturally.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the eyelid upwards and insert that into the eye socket, and have one or two or three eyelids at most.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then pull your hand in along with that which is inserted into the eye socket, and make it come out naturally through the eyelid.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is inserted into the eye socket and does not come out naturally through the eyelid, then forcefully insert it into the parts that you have prepared, until it comes out naturally from the trauma.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And leave that in place until the vision of the eye is clear, as you would do by inserting it and the eyelid, and close the eye, and let it rest for two or three days, until the eyelid adheres to its natural position and heals properly.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin is too short, then adjust a longer patch of skin from natural ones, and raise it up to where it should be long enough, and then raise that one.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	About the treatment of the ehrachtir which is in the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the huel ehacratir is in the eye and the contraction of the eyelid is towards the upper part, to the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the plate or scar tissue or cauterization, and this leporina is natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor consolidation of the plate or scar tissue or cauterization, or similar to its malcuratz.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation in this is that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it in that which is between those a cloth of lint, and tie them together when they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not use treatment of it from the causes that dry and contract; for if you do this, it will return to being more bad than at any time they did not have a fire.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that case which has the power to soften like fenugreek, and rub with the water in which they are soaked and mixed with it, or with dayquilon, which should be liquefied with some oils, and apply on that place, and cure that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your cure is that you perforate all the affected area that is not consolidated according to the form that fire makes at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation, which we have said, is nothing but a correction of chalicotherapy that does not return the form of the place according to what fire gives.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of chalicotherapy that is done in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This chalicotherapy that is done in the eyelid, which is not named vertadierament chalicotherapy; and it is of two kinds, one natural, another accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental chalicotherapy is done by pressure or by cutting or by cauterization or by other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle in which you make double thread, and put it on the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the flesh to the parts above and below the needle and cut it with the needle, and incise it widely.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the figure of the eyelid returns as it was, then good; but if not, take the needle and place it on the torn part, and with that, convert the eyelid, and make the two incisions on the side of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of the two incisions should be at two angles of the incision, which you have made while they converge, and make their ends meet when they gather together to form their figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter alpha.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then place the flesh there for the amount that is the thickness of the eyelid behind it, which closes the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and tie them with a thread of wool; and then care for those parts with what we have said about softening medicines and warm compresses until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the laceration is caused by a wound or suture or cauterization, then cut the flat flap of the eyelid according to what is prescribed.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the warm compress between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the sermon on the treatment of lacerations when it is raised or lowered, that it run in the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of laceration, and that is in the form of various shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the artist always prepares everything in each possible way that is possible within the time that he makes to return the figure to its natural form, or near it, and the patient according to what is convenient for the operation and tools in the best positions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in men who have their eyelid closed over the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from facilitating movement and their natural works, then you should remove the extramatter from under the eyelid, and raise it above or extend it to the corner.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you should insert a thin blade under the adhesion, which should not be sharp to avoid causing discomfort to the patient during the operation, and remove the blade that does not leave any mark on the eye.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be made with ease so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you should place saltwater in the eye; or use a solution of vinegar dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate the eyelid and eye with warm water, and place a piece of wool soaked in hog fat over the eye, and use it for three days until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of the beginning of a nail and the height of flesh from the lacrimal canals.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You should know that the nail is of two types, either it is nervous, like a thin, sharp needle; or it is not nervous, like white mucus, which when touched can easily take hold and be removed, and the skin does not stick to it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And the special ones do not begin until the larger lacrimal canal, which gradually covers the eye and prevents light and movement of the eyelid.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The type of work to be done at the beginning of it is that the patient lies down with their head in the middle, and another person raises their eyelids, and with your hand elevates the eyelid, and collects the nail from underneath with a pair of tweezers and extends it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert a small piece of horsehair or wool or cow hair, or something similar, or make the tip of the needle thin and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and glue it to the nail; extend it to the parts above, and excoriate the side of the nail that is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And if you continue to push the needle into the back of them.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And if you then insert the Romanent into the lacrimal canaliculus with a thin needle or small forceps, and lift the flesh of the lacrimal gland so that it does not produce continuous tears from this.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the finger is extended or bent as we have said, and then the thin needle is inserted into the lion's tooth-shaped part of it.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the corneal tunica with the needle and that it does not break in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then the insertion is made in the eye with a small amount of saltwater or a drop of honey, and lift it out again; and take care that what goes into it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the finger is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor stick it in that part of the eye, then this special type of finger is cured by medicines, and it is healed as follows:
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to incise that area, first you begin by making a cut in the patient's thigh and then take a sharp instrument of fine steel sharpness according to this form:
am subtilitat.	according to its thinness.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that that area is rarefied and contracted and you insert it into that place, then distill some of your own blood in the wound of the chief made from sanguisinaria or from the root of rosemary or from tincture of salt, and apply it to the wound on the other side.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until all that is from it has been removed, but if the opposite pus is in the wound, then you leave that area and cure the pus as soon as it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The emergence of the nasal cavity, if it is not seen in the wound for great harm, should be suspended from an onion; and incise that area from that one part, and do not complete the incision so that you do not incise the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a drop of laudanum into the lacrimal canal and make him sleep until he is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	About the beginning of the disease and about that which is born from flesh adjusted in the womb.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes flesh is born in the womb and is overgrown before it covers the pupil, or it approaches or becomes stretched on the eyelids, and it firmly closes the eyelids to the parts of the forehead, and it is assembled at the door of the balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation is performed when the patient lies on his back; and then open the eyelids of that one and collect all that flesh with scissors, and that flesh is a forceps or a spoon; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is all finished with the scissors, and guard yourself from the womb that you do not descend that one of yours operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision is the one that you incise those or with the needle which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps which are collected as soon as the shape of it approaches this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	When the incision is complete and the entire flesh is ready, then fill the wound with salt crust, or distill it into powder and similar to corrosive medicines, and place over the wound a cotton pad soaked in honey until it is certain that an abscess has formed.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause for alarm and the lord's health is not certain, and you fear an abscess has formed, then cleanse the wound and treat that abscess with a remedy that causes it to disappear, and repeat this treatment during the operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh that has occurred in the wound of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must ensure that all wound care is done naturally or accidentally, using iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you have made sure that that member has suffered that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of pus in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	When veins are swollen and appear as lumps on the skin, they prevent the surgeon from performing their operation, and they must be removed over a period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider whether the skin in which the swelling is located is thick and not another malady that swells, then collect that swelling.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And if you command the patient to hold their head in your hand, and then suspend those veins with an onion or two according to your judgment; and that onion should be of fine double thickness according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two onions gradually in a cloth according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	and then collect those veins with fine forceps, according to their subtility, and wipe the blood away frequently until those veins are no longer visible from the skin and have been turned back.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to damage the skin at the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the morning after sunrise, and you have a method firm in your operation that you only incise those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have finished, then you should distill some of the green or red wine into the wound to increase its healing power.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	However, if that is not possible at that time, then gather all the herbs that reduce the pain of the wound, and apply them to the wound for several days until the pain is relieved and an abscess is prevented.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the process until the wound is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On reducing hernias to the abdomen.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat hernias with cauterization or sharp medicine that does not heal immediately, then do not insert into the wound but rather make a small incision over the abscess to remove all the moisture inside and around it until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the bone is exposed and there is decay or discoloration in it, then use this instrument to clean it:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named for a sharp head, and it is made of iron, and the head should be round like the one that is made by punching with a needle or an awl for a delicate puncture (like in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the location of the bone damage, and then gently rotate it between your fingers until you know that that corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And that should be done several times, and then the location should be restored with drying and styptic agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the location is consolidated and it is in good flesh and the body is free from sin and for forty days, and it does not recur and does not become an abscess and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And otherwise, then not in the engine but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and that you uncover from second bone with iron or sharp medicine, and when it is uncovered like this, then you take a tribe according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The outer part of the iron is triangular, and its thickness at the end is as thick as this.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place that one over the bone, and that one near the lacrimal; and let your hand hold some of the bone, and then turn your hand around to push it into the tribe where it penetrates the whole bone, and that one feels the patient's pain as if it were entering through the bone.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, restore the area with drying astringent remedies as you have been shown.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and the area are hardened, the matter that was flowing to the parts returns to its place, so that is more likely over the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of the reduction of the prominence of the bone.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the bone protrudes completely and does not cause damage or reduction in the excretion, then let the patient lie down, and let it follow, and let you place some bandages with incisions and suction for good drainage; and let you place a liniment on the bone made of acacia, aloe, senses, and sarcocolla, and let you strengthen the plaster on the bone with some powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method for cleaning the bones is to take cloths of lion's mane, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; and make those threads.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place them one over the other according to the amount needed for the purpose.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then apply strength to them with a strong, thick bandage; and repeat the wound dressings with successive applications; and then remove the bandages and let the wound heal during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if the ligament becomes soft, then it should be kept straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the ligament as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound has already been reduced, then apply the ointment to the bones and the bandage and the dressings until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	About the beginning of the elevation of the uveal tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When the tear in the uveal tunic occurs, and it elevates and protrudes outside the eyelids like a large tumor, and it takes the shape of a man, and you want to incise it, then the operation is performed as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the edge of the uveal tissue from below and above, and then place another needle double the thickness of the lacrimal part in the same place, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the double thickness and lift that part of the uveal tissue around the needle, and apply strength to that thread.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then carefully remove the needle and place it on the wool soaked in albumen and let it lie there until the thread is absorbed into the wound.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for that place where the pain was, until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some compresses are made from the entire piece of cloth, and placed inside the wound, adjusting them to the shape of the wound, and then pierced with a thin spatula that reaches the bottom of the wound, and remove the albumen moisture, and lower the wound and insert it immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of cataracts.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease that is called cataracts is not other than the one that is adjusted in the wound, resembling descending water and is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The way to perform this work is that the patient should lie on the prepared bed, and then take the chief's hand in your two hands, and when you see the disease approaching the affected parts, and then dry it and do not let it descend, and keep the light, and the patient will see the causes as before.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not descend, you will know that it is a fever.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	However, if the preparation for descent is not done correctly, you will have to make the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula and place it on the conjunctiva continuing from the cornea (in the eye) until the fever is gone.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, when the fever is gone, you will have to distill water with cinnamon and honey in it that you have already made.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the other causes until they are healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure of the water descending from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the specifics of the water in the division and what is appropriate to pierce according to the speech declaring it, then that second one for healing.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	However, you should make the patient sit between your hands on a cushion and hold their eye open, then look closely at it.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your hand near the eyelid of his eye, if the eye is on the right side; or place your hand directly on his eye, if it is on the left side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And take a spoonful of the medicine with your right hand, if the eye is on the left side; or take a spoonful of the medicine with your left hand, if it is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the tip of the spoon near the cornea in the center of the eyeball, by the thickest part of the ray on the inside of the eye, and then pour the medicine into his eye and rub it with your hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And penetrate into the eyeball and feel that the spoon has reached its destination due to the medicine.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And cover that the measure of the spoon is the same as the distance from the edge of the pupil to the end of the eyeball, which is the corona of the eye; because you will see the pupil through the clarity of the cornea tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Approach the area where the water is, and then throw a cloth down nearby, and if the water descends somewhat, then quickly cover the patient with that cloth to protect their sight and place it under them.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then pause for a moment; if the water descends, then quickly pause that other cloth before it gets wet.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is dry and no longer descending, quickly remove that cloth, and with your hand wipe it off little by little, and dissolve a small amount of clear salt of gemstone in the water and pour it over the wound; and then place a cloth soaked in rose oil, albumen of egg, and honey on the wound and cover it.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	And those that were used in our time for this purpose are the album of egg.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your cloth to the instrument of the wound because of its roughness — which is one of the men from whom the wound is rough — then cover it with a spatula that is called the alberid, which has this form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that joint at that point, do not leave your hand in the wound, and do not make a mistake in finding the delicate location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then enter the second delicate location as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should prepare the patient for their sleep, lying down in a dark room where they can sleep on their side, and prohibit all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place your hand on the patient to calm their nature, and do not tire their head in any way.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the bandage be according to their condition by the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that in the dark room and extract the free blood, and let the patient see some causes, and then return the bandage by the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not do that in the hour of healing or soon after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having said that, you should do that in order for the water to be able to flow more easily and strongly due to great and violent pressure.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If a boil occurs, then for seven days remove the bandage over it and apply the same remedy that causes the boil to heal.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then examine the patient's face and place your hand over their mouth to hold back any vomit that may occur.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually raise the patient from that position and discuss their causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in some cases the disciple of vision is not exempt from certain precautions, and then proceed with the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have heard of some of those that are in Arabia, and some say that they make fire by rubbing two sticks together, which is successful in getting water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen any evidence of this in our land that has been proven to get water, nor have I found any such thing in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magic by which one can overcome those who know about them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	If the joints are naturally made of bone or iron, and their external parts are shaped like this triangle, with the sharp edge pointing in the same direction as that one.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	About the cure of flesh not rotting in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When different flesh in the nose is adjusted in various ways, and one of these causes is similar to a scorpion's tail or a polyp; and this disease is called a polypus, which is similar to that object represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from there, the flesh is cancerous, blackish in color; and from there, the flesh is not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those flesh that is not fraudulent or cancerous, make the patient sweat between their hands and place it in the sunlight, unplug their nose, and poke the wound with a sharp object in those flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the parts deformed, and then cut off that which you have understood of those sharp space agut subtil of one part where you know that all the flesh is stopped; because if it is from any cause of which the abscission is possible, then you remove that with one of the sharp instruments to facilitate it.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the lord has a boil or an abscess that has not healed, then pause over that spot; or it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cut out and cauterize the entire area where the boil has formed and all the cavities.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then insert a needle into the nose, near the beginning of the eye, or in the eye itself.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is opened and moisture enters into the palate, then know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If moisture does not enter after the second covering, then know that there is no flesh in the pus that has risen to the bones of the nose, where it cannot be reached by abscess.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then cover that spot where there is some swelling, and apply a poultice in the area, and pause between each application the amount of the same or the medicine, and examine the patient and insert an end of the cloth into the nose to find out what cause is possible at that time.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And once that is done, bring their nose close to the opening so that it reaches the nasal canals, and place it on their own nostril, as many children do in school, and it is the most likely cause of that action.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place both of the patient's extremities on their nose, one on top and the other inside their nose, and administer a cautery of meat to the nostrils that are in the patient, and do that until you know that the meat is already in the patient's nostrils.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the patient, and place in their nose an abstraction of salt and vinegar, and do that for three days or more until the running wound heals all that is inside the meat.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, place in their nose a gauze bandage to heal them until they are cured.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if they do not recover, use that.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to purge the nostrils with which they are distilled and medicines in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do that with silver or earthenware, which is similar to a small lantern, with a small base, and the meat in a similar way.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed canula like that with a cane, and the canula of the instrument is to be made of purging lead and flat, open; to which you hold it in the back of it, through which you can remove oil or that water that you want from the sucs and causes suction.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this purging is very precious: recipe of honey of castor, of white balm, of ginger, of pepper of safra, of long pepper, of escafragia, of spice ana unc. as you see how to make the suc of blood and of caul, and made into small pills, and one pill is dissolved in warm water, and it is given to the patient's nostrils just entering.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About the nostrils outside.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Nasal discharges are not outside the nostrils, and it is magnificent and important in other days when one looks at its condition.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for that cause, when you insert it at the beginning of the appearance of the intestine, and extract all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place your hand or cautery or burning medicine over the area where it was.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If it is too late for the insertion before the magnificat, then consider if it is calcified, hard, of dark color and little pain, then do not touch that iron which is the crancos abscess; because that person who inserted this abscess in the end suffered greatly from that one whom he had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of lion-like touch and not of dark color, and insertion is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and insert that remedy, and cure the area with that which dries and tightens before it becomes healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of stitching the nose and lips and ear when continuity is dissolved by wounds or similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	When there is a loss of continuity in one of these cartilages, do not consult on that operation with just any man.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when someone has any cause of those, consider whether it is a fresh wound or not, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure that within which it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of loss of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then consider that you scrape each part of their bone surface inside which it is not healed.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with stitches and strengthen those, and above them sprinkle healing powder of dragon's blood and tripled salt, and place a poultice of diachylon, or any other consolidating plaster, on the powder, leave that for two days or three, and then remove that and replace that plaster and cure that within which it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the solution of continuity or needles be added to the suture, as we have recommended in the abdominal suture, or add the solution of continuity with the thread that you have used and make it known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	About the extraction of those causes that come in the lower lips in the parts of the vagina.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Some boils are found in men in the parts of their lower lips, similar to hard abscesses, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should turn the lips and cut each of those hard parts, and fill the abscess with a mixture of tartrate of iron and sulfate of potassium until it is strengthened, and then wash with vinegar and treat the area with a solution that has hemostatic properties until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	About the beginning of flesh attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great number of worms live on the gum attached to the jaw, which the ancients called albulus, therefore cover that area with an onion or with a cloth and insert it into the mouth, leaving the saliva flow or the sand.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then place your hand on the area to stop the bleeding or apply powdery styptics or astringents.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then insert it secondarily and cauterize it, as the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the reason for iron teeth.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When sharp scales are attached to the teeth of the dead and the living, and some worms are black and are made yellow or green within which that gum rots and the teeth become yellow.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then squeeze the patient between your hands and press the head of the patient against your chest, and remove the teeth in which those sharp scales appear similar to sand within which no cause remains, and that is black and yellow and other colors within which they are transformed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If that is the case at the beginning of the reasoning, then it is good; otherwise, you repeat the reasoning on those points on another day and the second and third time until it comes to the end of the statement in which you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	You should know that the teeth have required different shaped tools and various figures according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so that you can see the tools that are used to cut the tooth from the part of the jaw and others that are used to scrape between the teeth in other shapes, and these shapes of tools should be prepared by you as follows:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You should care for the tooth from its pain in all ways and for a long time before its extraction, because there is no cause that prevents its removal when it is extracted, because it is a sublimated substance through which extraction is made.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the patient is ready to have that tooth extracted, you should be certain of what tooth is hurting, because sometimes the pain deceives the patient and thinks it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and hurting tooth is extracted, which we have already seen in the operation of teeth.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you must certify which tooth is causing the pain, and what you know about it, then cover that tooth with a space in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum in all parts, and then remove that from the teeth with a pair of fine forceps, or with delicate tweezers at the beginning slowly until you have removed them.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then use a strong twist in the large hands for good speech or to stop the patient from crying out, and place your hand on the head of the patient between his teeth that he does not bite, and then pull the tooth straight in a way that does not give him more pain, nor does it give the patient more pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place it there to facilitate and ease the removal of that which is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or decayed, then cover that break and tighten it with a thin wire at the end so that it does not break in the hour of your construction on that which you have placed.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And when you perform the incision carefully around the entire part of the gum and guard your strength so that it does not break apart from it, return over the patient to alleviate the majority of their pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their practice and audacity regarding the eradication of them, as they administer things that we have not recommended; for many of those remedies cause great harm to people, and all of their reasons are false, or some of those, or that they have extracted from the jawbone with which they have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the eradication of it, wash the mouth with vinegar or with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is a flow of pus, as with many remedies, then scrape some charcoal and sprinkle it on the wound, and if you do not find that charcoal, then cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and holding them subtly is what is praised for the initial long extraction, with a short handle and thick, so that they do not bend when performing those tasks.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And there should be times with a thick handle until when they are not bent, they are short extractions.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron or right-angled extractions, and in the extractions of those, there are teeth of which some are inserted into others and are extracted with great force, and sometimes they have the shape of a beak of a ciconia duck, so they hold well, and they are of great strength.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	About the removal of teeth and extraction of bones from the lower jaw that are impacted.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to remove a tooth that is impacted, first place your hand over the location where the tooth is located for one day or two until that location becomes soft; and then insert anesthetic or hold the extractions of which the shape is like the beak of a ciconia duck or guanta, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The outer parts of their joints were cut with a knife or scissors.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if they do not obey your command to open their mouth or hold it, then force them to open their mouth and remove all the flesh, and insert the instrument called the tongue depressor, which is a small lever with this shape:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if it is short and thick, make it slightly thin so that it is not too thick.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If the mouth is opened, good; otherwise, use these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular extramittent with some roughness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a more subtle tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you can use this instrument having two prongs of which the following is the appropriate shape:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And other instruments that you will need for tooth extraction; because it is important to do this with the instrument that looks like an ice pick, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the triangular extremity that is twisted or shortened, which is some swelling, and not thin enough to be a triangle.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another wise thing is that the instruments of the teeth are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the artists be skilled and subtle in the art, at least so that they can perform the operation and treat various diseases; for some of these diseases are of different shapes, for which the ancients did not say or make a specific instrument.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	May it be triangular the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth, or if it is broken, then carefully treat that which is in its place with the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help you with this form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is some swelling little by little, and it is stretched or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak until the bone is completely broken through; then restore the place with appropriate medicines to that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small pustule on the bone, then lance that pustule and its black core, and cure it within that it may be healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter thirty-two.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of prominent teeth above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent and do not follow their natural course for those places, the shape is awry, especially when it comes to women, and especially to noble virgins; therefore consider whether a tooth is not too close to another tooth, and if there is no possibility of extracting or straightening it, then you should extract that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then you should incise it with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it is similar to a pig's tongue, and should be made of Indian iron with a sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And if your incision is in the place where you incised it in three days because of the hardness of the tooth, and if it is not connected to another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is found to be extended to the ankle, then shave that part with this Indian iron knife of which this is the shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And if it is all made of Indian iron and the edge is the same; and if it is pointed with many small needles, which are made like this, then shave it a little at a time in several days to facilitate, so that there is no other scar and wound.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then line up that part with the skin, and shave it with this razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If it is found that one part of it is quenched and lies on the tongue, then cover that part inside so that the roughness of that fragment is stopped and covered, and is fully filled so that the tongue does not descend and the word is not corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of teeth that are damaged by gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents happen to teeth before the blow and removal by impact or by falling, and the patient cannot bear that which is missing, and you have cured it with hemostatic medicines, and your cure has not been successful, then in order that they do not rot in those that are strong by gold and not by silver, because silver becomes green and soon becomes poor, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And if the needle is too thin and rough according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reciprocating motion is that you take the needle and take double of it between two healthy teeth, and approach that it increases am two tortuosities of the needle between two dirty ones, or if one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the task in the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and knowledge until it is not dirty.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your string should be the one that strengthens the needle against the edges of the teeth that do not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess ends of the needle with forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place where you are working, and convert them to hide between the healthy tooth and the dirty one, so that it does not cause damage to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then remove that which is there with a spoon.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is slippery or rough, strengthen that one or those with another needle in such a manner in all its time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the form of healthy teeth and the figure of straightness of two healthy teeth and two crooked ones, as follows:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When one or two teeth return to their proper place in these areas, and they are recultivated as we have recommended, and they remain straight.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Only skilled and knowledgeable craftsmen can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Some cow bones can be used for certain causes of teeth, and they are made into the shape of a tooth, placed in the area where the tooth is missing, strengthened as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	About the beginning of the ligament that is in the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that is behind the tongue, some cow bones or the natural one that a man has, or an accidental and accidental one that has already been consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in this is that the mouth of the patient is opened, their existing cap in the throat; and they raise their tongue, and then insert that ligament nervous according to the latitude until the tongue is removed from its recent position.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is some difficulty or resistance in that area, and this is due to the consolidation of plague, then you should use a lancet and cut it through the tissue until you have dissolved the resistance.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to make a hole in the flesh and that you cut here through armor and blood flows out of the wound.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the tracks of the incision with vinegar or warm water or cold water; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from falling out, which would cause another obstruction.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is blood flow, place your hand over the wound; but if the blood stops, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery that is suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat those other causes until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of a ranula from under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some few wounds that occur near the tongue, resembling a small pimple, prevent the tongue from performing its natural operation; and it is greatly magnified until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation in this case is to open the patient's mouth in front of the sunlight and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of dark or black color, hard, to which the patient does not feel pain, then do not touch that part which is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is declined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you put the onion in it, and scrape that part with a thin spatula, and scrape it from all parts; and if pus comes out during your operation, then pause above the patient's mouth, so it does not come out.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have finished it, until it is washed with warm vinegar and salt; and cure that part with the other cure at that time when it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter thirty-six.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of abscesses from the armpits and of those that are in the groin, and of the other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess occurs in the groin, they are glands that resemble fat, which become deformed and are called armpits, which when you cure them with that which we have said in the division and are not healed, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, and of little pain, then do not touch it with a knife.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with a knife for fear of infection; leave it alone until it has matured, and then either you will lance it or it will burst by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, red, and the root of it is thin, then that one should be lanced.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation in it is that you consider, giving your operation, whether the abscess has recovered completely or if it has decreased somewhat; and then make sure the patient lies on their side, and the head of it is in your hand, and the mouth of it is open, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of it, and the instrument most noble of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or aram, and it should be thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press that tongue and it shows you the abscess, then grab that cloth, place it on that wound, and pull it out as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing you should remove from the tissues, and then incise that with an instrument of this shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, but the outer parts of which are curved, so that the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, so sharp, which should be made of iron and well-tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if that instrument is not at your disposal, then incise that with a spatula of this shape: and it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And if you have incised one wound, then incise the other according to this method of incision, and then guard the patient from getting wet with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is blood flow from the wound, apply a poultice of ground dog dung or of myrrh and similar to those used for stopping bleeding, in order to restrict the blood flow from the wound, and then cure it within that time.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Some women have also been known to insert other abscesses or those two golden ones into their vaginas, and incise them according to what I said at the beginning of the chapter on bees equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	I have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in her vagina, the abscess tending to a dark color, of little pain, which had already closed her vagina, and the woman was breathing very straightly, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and had already reached death if more days passed.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The abscess had already pushed so much that it had mezed two ribs inside through two holes.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, I advised him to make an incision and place it in one of the ribs, and then pull that out, and throw away a great portion of it, and then I advised him to incise that from where he understood the other wound, and then close the mouth of that, and press his tongue, and then place the rib in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then approach with a large part of it, not from it but a little bit of its skin.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the absolute remedy for that woman is to immediately begin drinking water, and then soon apply a poultice, and do not stop inserting it into that abscess for a long time, and successively apply a poultice in place of that, which is inserted until it is prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, you should apply heat and cauterize the remedy of that, and then make it stick; and then approach and do not clean what God has done to that place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the incision of a boil when it is formed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh is formed in the boil, and it is long, then it is not named perpendicularly; and if it is in the part that is thick and round, then it is called a bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When the remedy that we have mentioned in the division is cured, and you do not compare your cure, and you have often seen that the abscess has been healed from it and is thin, then cover that which is added round; and if it is at a certain length, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and is not at the same place, then cover the incision of it, where there is fear over the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you see that second hand which I have mentioned as white and long, you should make the patient lie down and take their tongue with an instrument that follows its shape and place the hook in the new place, and pull that one down and insert it into one of the two instruments that are called in the beginning of two needles.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And be careful not to insert it any more than what is adjusted over the natural term, because if you insert it further, you will damage their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And when the insertion is done, use that which we have recommended in the beginning of two needles, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the insertion of it, be careful not to use the cauterizing instrument in the cauterization of it, and the handle of the cauterizing instrument is only sharp water, and you should place the head of the patient in your own hand, and take hold of the instrument that we have mentioned, and also take some of the water that we have mentioned in the beginning of cauterization, and make sure that it does not cause any pain or subtle injury, and fill the hollow of the instrument with this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	If the extramatum is removed from the cavity in which the medicine is placed with the shape of a spoon, and the instrument for the medicine is placed on the wound, and the patient turns their head to the side so that saliva or drool from their mouth does not fall on the wound due to the internal medicine, so that no cause remains on the wound and it heals.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And place your hand on the medicine and press it against the uvula for the space of an hour until it is denigrated and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around that (the wound), and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray into a canula through which the cloth adheres to that canula, and do this until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound, and leave it there for three days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to repeat the medication, repeat that one, and after the cauterization, wash the area around the affected part with a cloth soaked in warm water, and change that cloth often during the treatment, and apply compresses inside until it is cured.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is safer than the beginning and longer than fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some wounds are cured with water that is more subtle than cauterization and beginning, which is cured with sublimation in this way: take camphor, hyssop, origanum, rue, scudded Arabic, camomile, broth, and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in a bowl, and immerse them in a very hot agreement, and boil; and the bowl should be well washed with decent water, and there should be a trough above the bowl, on which should be placed an instrument made of aram according to this method; it can be made of silver or aram.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	When the tip of the patient's tongue is inserted into their mouth before the steam reaches the uvula above the palate, then the uvula becomes obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this procedure until it dries, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the onset of abscesses, as it would aggravate the abscess, and do not do that, but rather declare the declaration of the abscess from there carefully.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument present, then take a needle and make a small opening on the surface of the patient's tongue, as the lid of the hen's egg prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of thorns and of what sticks to the groin and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Things stick to the groin or thorn of the foot or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then take out that which is visible from those, upon which the sight is placed, rather than using a tongue depressor, in order to declare what is in the mouth.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which is not visible and is hidden in the mouth, take out by making the patient vomit, because the cause of the disease is often removed from the mouth by vomiting; or by using a spoon of bread, a piece of rag, or a bowl of dry food; or by taking a sponge of sea sponge and soaking it in strong vinegar, and then placing it in the patient's mouth, because when the sponge is placed in the place where the thorns are and are removed, they are often removed.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And also take an eel and soak it in strong vinegar, and then cut it into pieces and extract it; or take a pear and cut it into pieces and extract it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If the above causes are not removed, then use an instrument of this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	If it is a large needle, use a small one, and in the outer part of it, which you will insert into its neck, to facilitate.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And lift the patient's head up, and watch that the touch of his neck bones, so that it does not happen to him, or the bone or the spine, or what the doctor puts in his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But if the patient feels pain at that insertion, because of his knowledge of the location of the adjacent cause and he puts it down, and pulls his hand up with the instrument, all this according to the amount that is prepared for him before he is pierced.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of blood clots attached to the neck.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood clots are treated with what we have said in the division of the cure and not with medicines, consider this in the neck of the patient at noon, because you have already understood the tongue of him with the instrument that you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	If you see blood in the urine, remove it with a small or precise instrument carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to remove it, then take a concave canula and insert it into the urethra of the patient, and place a lit iron in the concavity of the canula, and do this as many times (until the blood in the urine is dead and does not come out of the urethra) and keep the patient on a water diet all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a full cup of water and pour it into the patient's mouth, and wash the mouth with that; do not force any cause in the patient's mouth and let the water cool for an hour, then another servant holds their hand, so that the blood in the urine feels like water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	And if the recommended remedy is not forgotten, then sublimate the patient with camomile or asafetida using the instrument we have recommended for the sublimation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do that, so in four steps.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	There is another way of operation in suffocation of that, you take an instrument in which there are coals ignited and the instrument is covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and it is placed in that hole the end of the instrument; and then remove the suffocation; and place the patient's mouth on the end of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the suffocation is not forced out until you know that the suffocation has reached the lungs, because the lungs are the first to be affected.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then you repeat the suffocation for a while, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salty and other foods, and not drinking water, and if necessary, this regimen should be discontinued.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to treat blood from the neck when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps sometimes, but with some curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The one who is at the head should be similar to the beak of a stork, which is curved, and the tip of it is polished with a file, so that when it touches any cause, it does not leave a trace.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the speech on the understanding and removal of abscesses.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are special masses, of various shapes, according to the memory of them, each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in puncturing and incising them by various methods, one of which is for the type of abscess itself to be introduced; and because of this, they understand about the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the places where the body's accidents occur, such as the abscess in the head is different from the abscess in the anus; and the abscess in the flesh is different from the abscess in the joint; and each of them has a specific treatment.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	Moreover, some abscesses that have not been properly drained can lead to the maturation of pus in those places or their complications.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other abscesses that are punctured when they are ripe, and not matured according to their complications, such as abscesses near joints, when an abscess approaches a joint, it is prolonged into the nearby pores, and often the tendons or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay its puncture until it is matured, it will cause harm to the principal member; or it is near the anus, so puncture that unmatured one; and do not puncture it crudely, but rather the one that is near the anus, so that it does not perforate the intestine and is elongated to the parts of the anus, and is made a fistula, or that is done in the term of the abscess that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When you know the time for the puncture of the abscess, and it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know when the abscess is ripe when the pain and fever subside, and there is a decrease in the headache and pulse, and an increase in the hardness of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you know when the puncture should be made in the place closest to the abscess and from which healing is expected.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The puncture should be made quickly through the long bones of the body or the body itself, if the abscesses are in the joints of the hands or feet, and in the locations of the ligaments, tendons, muscles; and at the back, in all locations where reflection does not occur; because in those that reflect, use puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in fleshy places, it is customarily said that you should not make the puncture until the digestion of the abscess is confirmed according to the complement, as we have said; because if you puncture that one beforehand, the length of the body of the patient is prolonged, and there is great swelling, and the lips of the wound are hardened and the depth of the wound.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	If the abscess is too large to be drained according to the size of the flesh or bone, or according to what the member needs, then it should be drained according to what the limb requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And when administering small incisions, and in large abscesses, make a large and wide incision or section according to the difference in size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses where the pus should be contained and incised, when it is made, it should be done in such a way that the pus can flow out, as with those that occur in the armpits and groin.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that have three-angled incisions; and of those that are made with the figure of a fan, as with the abscesses in the armpits.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those that are administered round and crescent-shaped incisions, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	If the abscess is not like those that are shallow and superficial, then you should make a shallow incision or just plane it.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, do not be afraid to drain all the pus in that hour; taking a part of it, and the next day put the abscess back together, and the following day take a larger part, and gradually drain more of it until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is very young, or weak, or a child, or elderly and in decline, where the animal spirit is more old and resolved at the exit of the pus, and very often the patient dies, and you perform these operations on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be very careful with this chapter and your incision where you drain these abscesses, so that you remove the pus and consider whether the pus from the abscess is little, or a flat section, then you administer drugs of it or of another; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the incision are large, then you wait until they meet before draining them.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If a piece of the gallbladder or its neck is removed from the abscess, or if it has been torn there in the circle, then cover it with a piece of old or new cloth made of fabric, as when you have drawn out splinters or thorns, which are wet; and strengthen it within three days; and then process it and cure it with that which comes from the juices inside until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If during the operation, blood flows from you, then administer cold water and vinegar in which a cloth of linen has been soaked, and place that over the location of the flowing blood, which is vegetated.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the blood flow persists, then administer regimen and treatment and powders which have been recommended in various places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in winter time, and the location of the abscess is near nerves, then cover it with powders of vinegar and oil cauteric, and place those on the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	When it is summer, and the wounds are fleshy, let it be known that you place poultices of ground barley or vinegar and oil or wine and oil, and all of this should be applied within a day, as we have said, and then let it be known that you remove the abscess and cleanse that area, and administer to him what is suitable for his cure within a day, as we have said.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus is the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but separately, as we have already said, there are different ways of treating each type of abscess specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Regarding the section on abscesses that occur in the neck of the shoulder.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	Small abscesses in the neck of the shoulder, and they are of a special kind that contain tunicae that are their own; and their specialty is their movement.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are sharp, and of those that contain moisture similar to honey.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those that contain moisture similar to feces, and similar to them; and of those that are rocky, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the dry section, and in the extraction of those, you should not be afraid, as you would not do so with the extraction of those that do not cause harm.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the dry section of those that you extract with an instrument of the shape that approaches it, which is called a trocar, as long as you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If that which contains moisture is cut with that section according to its length and on the surface in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And beginning at the line of .B. to the line of .G., then when the moisture is evacuated, you should scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, because overgrown troops return, if there is any cause of it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian mucus, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that place and leave it for another day, because that which is of that layer will be corroded by it.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the Egyptian remedy second and third, if necessary, until you are confident that there is no cause for that rash; then cure the ailment with the remedy until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you insert this second remedy in this way:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a sharp needle, making it have the shape of a crochet, and inserting it between two lips of the incision and cutting that from all parts, and exerting your skill in extracting the membrane that contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your tool causes discomfort, then do what I told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, perform the incision and cure of the abscess containing thick pus according to what we have told you; and an incision over an abscess containing thick pus is more dangerous, because it is less safe and has less moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some people have such abscesses that they are completely dry; the cause of which is that if you incise over an abscess on the head of an old woman and pierce the abscess as hard as a deaf stone, white, and cannot be quenched, and if anyone is struck by it, it will cause harm.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other places, accidental abscesses in the head or this is not this chapter, as with abscesses that come to the heads of children and must be explained by the reason of the hales, but the section of all these should be superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And place your hand over the lowest part of them to prevent the smell of the body from reaching the lowest parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then use that which is appropriate for healing, as in healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofulas, which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses occur in the neck and in the armpits and in the elbows; and some occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and those that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is within their own tunic, and as with the nodes and abscess of the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the specific types of these scrofula are lumps, some of which are stony, and some of which contain moisture, and some of which are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	And in that one which you see in good position in the Tactile, of which the color of that which is manifest is propitious to the color of the gum, and is magical to all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the ribcage, and is not prone, so that you should incise that one from the dry surface of the part above the part below the line of .G. within the line of .B., and score that one from all parts, and extend two strips of gum to the size of an onion, or to the size of a small onion if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that small one by one.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more caution that the vein or nerve is not incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And the space should not be too sharp, so that it does not adjust your hand to the incision, or disturb the patient, and that you do not incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you were to incise a vein or ribcage and prohibit yourself from your operation, then pause in the place of vitrified trefoil or other powders that keep bleeding away, and clean the place, and leave that which is inside so that it does not increase the acuity of the abscess and soften the place and begin to be pus-filled.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the wound is removed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	So return to your operation before the time is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if there is any cause of other small scrofulas in the vicinity, then investigate those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the area of the large vein scrofula, then do not investigate that one from its area.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you cover that with a strong bandage and let it fall through itself to avoid harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the area of the old wound that you have already immersed in Egyptian mud, and then heal it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you investigate that entire scrofula, then cover it with a bandage and adjust the two lips of the wound so that there is no excess.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess due to the greatness of the scrofula, then investigate the area of that, and suture it and administer that which is called.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And in the case of scrofula that contains moisture, make a superficial incision on the location where it appears to you to be maturing, and pause the incision of that which is deepest in the flesh, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the incision, using forceps and similar instruments, to remove that which is rotten from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see the wound already cleaned, then you cure that which is generated of flesh before it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the separation of the core of an abscess through the swelling.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients performed this incision in the abscess, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of their speech.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men who have curvature, the extraction of the abscess should be avoided, as it is not done well because all the veins and major parts of the patient are in that place.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have boils in the mouth or throat or two tonsils, when the illness is not in the teeth, cut off the section of epiglottis to prevent its loss which is done by incision.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when you want that, cut off three or four small sections of the epiglottis, in the area between two circles for quantity, which is in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for section, which is private of flesh and the vessels of sinew from it are not painful.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is afraid, then extend the tongue of the throat to the back, and then pierce the tongue until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of sinew if there is some cause from those.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the lip secondly as we have recommended; and it is significant over the section of the canal for the flap which is from that and this is the part that is from it which is disrupted and by the abscess of the mouth.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Let the wound remain open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Since the hour has come when such perforation is feared, add two flaps of the skin of the wound, and place it alone on the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh heal before it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And as Albucasis says that the summary of this speech we have recommended is that if a patient with quinsy has already opened the throat, and the patient dies, and his mouth is closed, and they can insert the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the area of the wound for some time, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that reason, leave the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and such evil lasts for three days; and therefore, commander, in this way, leave the wound open, and cure it before it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And such as I have seen myself, is that a servant holds a knife and inserts one part of the lung canal into the patient's throat, and was called for its cure, and at once covered the mouth with the tongue as it is in the mouth of the dead, and uncovered the wound and covered the sanctum which was on the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, it was confessed that there had been no incision of veins or guided ones, and the wind was from the wound, and healed that within which fire was used.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if the servant does not refuse in the mouth, and then return to the better position of their dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the epiploon there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	About the incision over the abscess that occurs in the groin, and is called hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called hernia of the groin is an abscess of the second color of the body, and is caused by the women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one, there is no cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one occurs in two ways, either similar to large nodes, or similar to an abscess that is made by the rupture of an artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not let him make any presumption about it, like with a knife, unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine that and investigate it, and if you find a similar shape to a gout node, and it is not hanging from any of the veins, then you should insert that with the nodes, and extract that which contains the pus and blood; and if not, then you should thoroughly examine its entirety, and then treat the area with what can cure it before it becomes healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the separation of the types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes, there are different types and I have already described all their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you should remember that it is difficult to distinguish between a node and an abscess when making a diagnosis.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, you should say that an abscess is characterized by heat, fever, and severe pain until the boiling of the excess subsides; and it is completed putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	If there is no heat or fever or pain, and if you count the pulse of the lion which is in the heart, it is proper.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And if the second color of the body is like a cheese and is made in this way, whether larger or smaller, and there are two species, one being oily and containing moisture, and the colors of moisture are mottled, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you reach the cure of the pulse, remove that and inquire about that which is at the beginning of the instrument called the interosseous, according to its form, which is appropriate for this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is necessary to inquire about abscesses and all swellings, and you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid place where you find the abscess, and you rotate the tips of this instrument little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the abscess.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then place your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and remove the instrument and consider what is found in its tracks.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current moisture is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you insert a dry surface section as described in the other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture in the traces of the insertion, then you know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And apply a dry surface section in the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you were taught, suspend that with the noose, and scrape the skin of all parts to facilitate, and keep the skin or bag, if possible, over that and remove that pus from the wound.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to remove that skin, and therefore you must wait until that skin is healed before removing it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If the wound opens again for any reason, too much or too little, then return the wound according to the most.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the wound opens again in some small part, then complete the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place your hand over that part which is the source of the abscess cautiously, and cure that from another treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is necessary to perform great surgery, then take both of his lips and heal that wound with it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the pulse is normal or not, then apply a poultice of tartar and leeches to that straight for two days or three until the inflammation subsides and the boil returns to its original state; and then return to incising that which remains.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those that are the forms of probes, and of three kinds, one of which is large, another is medium, and another is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large probe is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium probe is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small probe is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, of silver, of the ends of curved instruments properly, in order that the instrument may not be injured by the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of the experimenters, and they are called Alberic and one of them is named Berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three spices, one of which is great, pepper and parsley.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great experimenter, his shape:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the pepper experimenter, his shape:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the parsley experimenter, his shape:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is convenient for those abscesses and ulcers and fistulas and boils that between them are of bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And there are made reeds, large, lions, as with great needles that are sewn the sails, and they are made of bamboo, or of wood, or of iron, or of silver, And the best are when they are made of bamboo.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made of black lead, which are said to be for those who have opened the fistulas in the cavity of which they are reflections, that they are reflected by their light on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of three sizes, according to the length of theirs, and of the others, and of the shortest, according to the quantity of the opening of the fistula and the stricture of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the great plug:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium-sized plug:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small plug:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the needles are of three special types, namely those that have only one curvature, and they are of three sizes: large, medium, and small.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of theirs there is a needle with two curvatures, and it is of three sizes.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those that have two curvatures, they are of three sizes.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those that have three curvatures, they are of three sizes.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a large simple needle:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium-sized simple needle:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple needle:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large double-curved needle:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The shape of a pear or a bell, like that one:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a pear or a little bell, like that one:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of a large pear with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The shape of a pear or a bell with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of a little pear or a bell with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a large pear or a bell with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a pear or a bell with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a little pear or a bell with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the shapes of the cautery knives that are sharp and sharp the boils and abscesses, and they have three species, four of which are large, pear-shaped, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	The shape of a large cautery knife:
Forma del scapel migier:	The shape of a pear-shaped cautery knife:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The shape of a small cautery knife:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The edges of those that are made by cutting are sharp, and the other edges are not sharp, and they are not pressed in such a way, but so that it can be done well in the excoriation of the boils to avoid the fear of incision of vein or nerve, and for those it is healing for the patient and at the same time tranquility a little by the scar left from the excoriation of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the shapes of amulets, and there are three species: large, medium, and small, as you see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large amulet:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a medium-sized amulet:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a small amulet:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	These are the shapes of herbs and their likes, which are made into a poultice.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the external part, where the pricked herb is hidden with a space, and in that place, you divide and open the parts as you wish, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the mentioned parts for the perforation of abscesses and do not pierce the intestines, and there are three species: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of those bandages that are removed from the wound of the sanguineous fluid, and there are three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of which:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	These are the shapes of herbs that are round or some length, and they are thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should have great skills in making these special types of incisions, thin and deep, so that for those abscesses you can quickly remove pus with velocity in necessity, and later when the first medicine is not effective.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, you should not use those incisions to remove pus in all parts of the body, and you should only use them in fleshy areas, such as on the ribs of the chest and thighs, and on the ribs of the arms, and the breasts, and the belly, and the groin, and similar to those fleshy areas.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some wounds are made with other instruments similar to these lancets, according to this form; through which the pus is removed when a bloodletting is performed, or you must make an incision of a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some wounds are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	About the care of the breasts of men, which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some women inflate their breasts to complement the pleasure of sleeping with them when they begin to become pale, and then they inflate their breasts, assemble their breasts like those of women, and they are remote.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to those who follow this, cut the moon-shaped parts according to this line from .B. to .G., and then excoriate the entire groove, and place the plaster of fleshly medicament on it, and adjust the two lips of the plaster in a smooth manner, and cure that within which it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast declines to the parts behind and is softened by its magnitude as if it were like women, then cut it in two at the upper part, making two sections similar to a lunar figure, of which each contains the end of the other, so that the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line from .B. and .G. And then excoriate the cord that is between the two lips of the plaster, remove the fleshiness, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary in the healing within which it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the initial incision for the patient's anxiety and due to excessive bleeding, then cover the wound with a plaster soaked in corrosive liquid and leave it to eat away at the dead flesh, and then care for the area that is healing.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	About the perforation of abscesses that come from the tonsils.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from the tonsils are of the species of scrofula, hard ones, which contain a pus.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain moisture, those that contain moisture should be incised in the lunar shape according to this figure: from line G to line B. And as soon as all the matter is evacuated from the abscess, then close it with a clean cloth and leave it for the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And keep the wound open and treat it with an appropriate liquid until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the glands in the neck and the scrophula is present, then you should lance it as we have described in the section on scrophula equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague is spreading to areas that are not affected, then you should apply the cautery as we have described in that section.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the incision of abscesses that occur by accident or by vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the rib is broken, and the flesh that is over it is consolidated, then you should make incisions in the abscess and remove the sinews by which inflammation and abscess are known to occur through the artery or vein: because when the abscess is caused by an accident, it is longer attached to the body; and that when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a noise in the area.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And those that are caused by the vein are reduced to the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And incision into this abscess is an error, and especially in those that are near the bones, and in the angles, and in many parts of the body; and it is a great risk, so you should avoid it if possible, and those that are on the outside or on the head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Over the area that belongs to them due to inflammation of the orifice of the arch, cut through the thick section in the long; and then remove the section with tweezers, and remove the arch, and remove the tunics that are discovered inside.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place the needle on that area and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the arch with double force in two places, — which causes you to have seen in the extraction of two arches that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then push the area between two ribs with space enough to reach the entire spine, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which pus is generated within the ribs; and then cure that with appropriate means to that area until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is due to section of the vein, then cover that area with your hand at the possible location of the abscess on the side, and then introduce the needle behind the location where you have held your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that area double in length until you remove the other from the other side, and then tie the abscess at two ribs according to what I have told you in the rib of a grape of two parts of two extremities of the vein.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that the thread might come out, then insert the reliable thread into the pus at the beginning of the wound, and strengthen the four threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the pus in the middle of the wound before it is inserted into that which is inside, and insert the excess thread from the needle, and leave what is left inside.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand over the cotton that you have soaked in wine and oil, and administer the cure that is made with herbs and ointment while it is being healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to the twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, when abscesses occur in the bones and veins, and similarly when abscesses occur in the nerves when they occur due to excessive use or similar causes.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made in the most suitable place for the assistants or the tailor, or in any place where the joints are not affected.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And if it is a severe abscess, and resembles the color of the other body, and is located in the major parts of the patient, and when stretched with violence, it feels like a great shock to the patient.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And if it is not an abscess attached to the front of the body, and for this reason it is left behind, and it is weak at all parts and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those who are in the joints should not be pierced with iron, because it would often cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But if it is in the head or forehead, then make a small incision.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then use the forceps and cut that of the root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then hang it up with an hook, and scrape that, and remove it; and place the wound under a bandage, and cure it before it becomes healthy.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	About the lancing of an abscess that occurs in the cheek, which also occurs in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	When men experience swelling in their abdomens and other parts of the body, which are called fungal due to their similarity to those that grow on mushrooms, with subtle reasoning and a large head; and their lips are conversed, and they are those that are small, and they are those that are very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in his abdomen there were two parts that were more like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, of small reasoning.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And their lips were conversed and they opened, and water was running from there all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I inserted those and reinserted one in his foot at the eighteenth hour of the day, and the other at the sixth hour.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation at the beginning of their insertion is to consider whether the patient is wet, and the color of the skin is white, wet, of subtle reasoning; then you insert it with a flat spatula, and in your presence cauterize it in the fire, because swellings that are caused by separation must be expelled by burning; and if you find the burnt part, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient becoming anxious and fearful, then keep a sharp sword near; otherwise, take a recent blood sample, strengthen that arm, which is the one we have mentioned, and let it rest for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust in the stricture of the blood vessel; therefore, do not stop strengthening the large, dirty blood clot in that arm until it is removed and falls by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	However, if the arm is of large size, there may be some cause for fear and terror, especially in that one which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	However, it is possible that you incise the vein of that arm, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then care for it until it is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to incise the arm that is of dark color, light sensation, and regular pulse, because that one is cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you will remember the cure for this condition soon.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the cure of an abdominal hernia.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	An abdominal hernia is caused by various causes; or by a fissure in the navel, which is on the abdomen, and through which the intestine or hernia protrudes according to what is appropriate for the other ruptures; or by weakness of the muscle, which flows from vein or artery according to what is called this, or by constriction of the abdomen in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is by a fissure in the navel and protrusion of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and the pain is severe, and appears in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is by the protrusion of the intestine, then the position of that one is like that of what we have mentioned, with greater diversity, and as you press that one, the pain disappears, and then returns; and very often it is in the same place, and is a magnificent motive to introduce the bath and great labor.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, then it is lion and not hidden when you press your hand, nor is it constrained or believed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to pus, then this sign appears in the abscess as it becomes black and declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is due to meat, then the abscess is heavy, large and hard, and it is attached after a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to venosity, then the touch of it is lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to pus from an abscess, or from a vein, or from venosity; therefore it should be prohibited from its treatment, because in those cases there is fear and fear as you have been taught in the chapter where he mentioned the abscesses from abscess and from vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to hernia or hernia, then you command the patient to hold his own, and be extended; and then touch around the entire umbilicus, and command it to be between your hands on its own two, and then circle with the thin span around the circumference of the umbilicus over the place that you should have properly placed the touch; and then extend the mass of the abscess to the parts above the ankle; and then tie in the circuit a strong or weak thread and the method of the thread's descent.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then bring the towel over the abscess and insert the mentioned instrument into that place and try to push the intestine back; and if you have not previously guarded it through the incision, then you will extract the pus and push the intestine to the parts of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the towel, then take that needle and remove any excess from it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is against your artery or vein, then circle that spot, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two fields strongly and insert two needles around the abscess in the shape of a cross, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and let the wound heal where the flesh extends and falls off; or if it is thin and can be removed, then cure that which covers the wound with something that will keep it clean until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the prominence of the navel is made of flesh and no matter or due to moisture, then cover it with the pus that we have mentioned and remove the pus or the moisture, which is found in it, and then cure that area with a remedy that covers it and that consolidates it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 43.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the treatment of cramps.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, about specifics for cramps and how to treat them with medicines, and that it is advisable to use iron in their treatment so that they do not become ulcerated; and we have said that cramps are generated in the most and greatest care of their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancients said that some cramps are in places where eradication is possible, such as cramp in the breasts or on the cushion and similar to the members allocated to stretch all of that, and especially when they begin small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and severe, do not cover it with yourself, because you will not be able to heal from that or any other, nor has it been reached by that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	When the operation is performed as we have said, first you precede and remove the patient and purge them of black bile for some time, and then sew it up, if found to be manifest.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation in which they are located, and prohibit them from eating anything that could cause a reason for the operation. And then examine every part of the body thoroughly without causing any harm.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And then let the blood flow, and do not remove it in the same way, and express the places where the blood is flowing, and wipe away the thick blood from your hand or the instrument that you can possibly use from the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you find thick blood at the beginning of a vein or artery, then cauterize it while the blood is still flowing, and then care for that spot until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 4
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, of the species of dropsy of the water, and the symptoms of each species, of its cure with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the one who is cured with iron is only of the kind of toothpicks, and not close to iron of the kind of tympanists or of the kind of hypodermic needles, because that is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this kind of hypodermic tympanist, with medicine and not with your medicine, then consider, why if the patient has been weakened, or is another sick person of the same kind, such as in the chest or stomach and similar to those, then guard yourself that you do not treat it with iron, because there is fear over it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient of great virtue and it is not another disease but only hypodermic so much, and not child or old, then the method of operation of it is that you lift the patient between your arms, and give it to the exact place of its belly with its hand, pushing water to the part behind the pentenilh, and then take a sponge in this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	should be of two sharp points long, from the sharp end with a spatula; but rather it should be in some shortness gradually, so that in the operation you do not pierce the intestine, and that it does not hurt him.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider whether the generation of hydrocele is due to the intestines, for it is said that you should make the section along the belly for the amount of three fingers behind, on the right side of it over the peritoneum.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydrocele is due to a disease of the testicle, then your section should be on the left side of the belly for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to a melon, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not let your section be on the side on which you want to place the patient so that the excess does not flow to that location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce the instrument through the entire cord, and enter it into that section, and lift your hand between the cord and the siphac, and you scrape it; and if the amount is one finger or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then proceed to pierce the skin until you reach the space where the water is located at the location.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or of thin gold or of lion's hair, at which in the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and it is shaped at its end by carving according to the manner of the pen, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And on the upper part of it is a ring, which when the instrument reaches the water, you should immediately raise it over the instrument, and then evacuate the water in small quantities, because if you evacuate too much at once, the patient may die from the resolution of their spirit animal, or an accident may occur to them that is approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	You should also evacuate the water according to the amount of the patient's strength and according to what means to you the dispositions of the patient's strength of their leg and goodness of their body.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and release the water that causes this, which is usually held by a thread that you should pull through the opening of which it is recommended that you pierce that second in that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the instrument on the other side if the patient tolerates that, and remove a small amount of water, and do this for several days, and be careful not to let any water out.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you are afraid of the patient, and leave a large amount of water in them, then cure that one with burial in sand, and moisten it with water, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and cure that one with desiccating medicines until they are healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the melon and the finger close to the extraction of water, according to what I have said before.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the cure of children who are born without a perforated bladder.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the children born from the belly of their mother, the head of their mixture is not pierced (or is straight or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, cover the opening with a thin substance according to this form as soon as it is born.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And place a thin nail with a flat head on that and tie it, and do this for three days or for fourteen days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	When he wants to urinate, he should remain lying down and urinate; then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not place the flat head, it is possible that the urine that passes over that place does not clean this cover.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	That is, the one who has a straight opening should be treated with a flat nail as we have said, for three days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	That is, those in which the opening is not in its place, the cause of that is because of those who are born with a straight penis so that they cannot urinate at the proper parts, until they raise the penis to their chest; and it is not in the generation, because then the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and it is a malady caused by a lack.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of the operation is that the patient should be lying on their back, and then extend the head of the knife towards your left hand with great forceful extraction, and insert the tip of the knife into the location of the pericardium at a sharp angle, as if you were writing with a pen, or do not cut any part, so that the edge of the knife resembles the tip of the knife and that the blood falls into the second location.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation of phlebotomy, four things can go wrong with that; and pause at that point where you remove the vein, and cure the wound before it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 66
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the white matter that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the knife and corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the knife.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Four things that can go wrong with this white matter in the knife and its sharpness and flesh lag.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	No-malignant, cover it with a thin ointment and remove the one that contains all the malignant parts; then place your hand over the affected area and apply the ointment until it is cured.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the tumor is malignant, use a black ointment, then cover it with a cloth and apply heat to the beginning and end of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	However, if the tumor is on the prepuce of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the tumor is inside the prepuce and the other part is exposed, then cover the part that is inside with a cloth until it is consolidated; and then cure the exposed part, because when you cure the prepuce, it is not guaranteed that it will not be damaged.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if there have been accidents in the genitals and the black and corrugated skin, then cover everything that has already been discolored and that is about to be corrupted or that has already been corrupted; and then apply linen over it and cover it with a poultice made of flour of scorsa de milgrana and of earths, thistles, and cress.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure the other wound until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	However, if there is excessive bleeding, then administer silver nitrate in the following manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	where the pointed cautery is placed at two positions apart, so it is at the bleeding and on the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corrupted and destroyed completely in an hour, then introduce a catheter into the opening of the foreskin to allow the patient to urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in those where the foreskin is known, and over it is not required circumcision; and when adherence occurs due to wound or abscess) then scrape with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove those exquisitely, then scrape with a spatula from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and pull out the foreskin, which when thin, is easily perforated by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then gently separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis with a small, sharp instrument, which has been previously soaked in water to prevent adhesion of another layer.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then apply a styptic powder to stop the bleeding once it has stopped.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	About the cleaning of children and the treatment of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continence as in other diseases: rather, it is a matter of our operation and our will, and it is particularly appropriate in children, so it is necessary to assign the best possible operation and method to prevent loss of life.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision on any of the free people, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experiment that the majority of the craftsmen and barbers use circumcision and cleaning with a knife and a thorn; and they use a cord and an unguent.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	When you have already tried all these methods and nothing improves the condition, it is better to use forceps, scissors, or a needle that can be used in surgery, as the string of the foreskin under two layers of skin, and the layer of skin is usually on the other side, and sometimes it is necessary to do so with great care.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the surgical procedure that is done for circumcision, and digital, of which blacksmiths use, it is not certain where the incision of the end of the male member is made, as it often enters into the wound of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation, a needle, if not used properly, can cause damage to your surgery.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The string of the child is short by nature, and sometimes it grows in such a way that it does not require circumcision, and I have seen such cases.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But from the circumcision that is done with forceps, scissors, or a needle, I have found by experience that the forceps have an unproportional incision, as the sharpness on top is the same as the sharpness on the bottom; and therefore when you press your hand in proportion to two sharpnesses, and make an incision at one time, it is a compression of the needle that contains the string of the foreskin of all parts, and does not make any error of all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first step in the operation is that you make the child very still, especially if it is one of those who understands a little, that you only hold them by their back so much as necessary, and that you leave them alone for the rest of the day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then do everything possible to make that child happy in all that way.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make sure that child is between your arms, prepared properly, and not naked; and hide the forceps in your hand or under their foot, so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on their back and blow in their mouth, and pull out the one that is stuck at the end of the back, and modify that which is added from the sound.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the place where the wound is located with a clean cloth, and then put a small bandage under that one, and then take the same pous and end it at the location of the bandage, with good retention, and insert it between two bandages.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Approach the patient's head and carefully remove the cap of the bed; then gently lift the soiled sheets little by little, which is better; place powder above and on the powder place a cloth in which is spread a poultice of bread soaked in honey and garlic with rosewater recently boiled; and lay that over the other side; and cure that with the appropriate cure until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the forceps for extraction, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The handles of the forceps are not too sharp and the other ones are sharp, so that the end of the hook does not hurt, and the length of the two blades is as long as the length of two equal-sized handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in extraction is that the forceps does not completely enter the internal mouth, or part of it must be inserted from the beginning.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, make sure that you insert the other one of your hour from the beginning of the wound and that you insert it at the same depth.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a needle and insert it there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has passed three days, and that is what is inflamed behind the nail, then let that out carefully, scrape that area, and insert the second one that you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the nail head, so it does not hit that.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And cure that with the powder that we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it does not fit exactly, and you follow the instructions above, then that will not be the case.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And cure that with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or congealed mucus, or by phimosis or foreskin, and similar to those of which we have said about the methods of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and you see retention of it due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then cover the patient with a blanket to keep them warm.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the feet of that person on their own bed and extend their belly from the upper part of their back, and the patient should tighten their abdomen as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is pressed to expel the stone from the parts behind, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the urine is not dissolved and the cause is very strong, then cover the patient with a blanket and use an instrument called a catheter, which is made as follows: It should be made of silver and have a thin, sharp point, like a lion's claw, and a thin, sharp end like a palm leaf and a finger, to which a thin, sharp point should be attached at the top.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of extracting the urine by that person is to take the catheter, fold it in half, and tie it with wool or thread for good hold; then insert the folded end of the catheter into the part behind the catheter, and if there are any superfluous causes of the wool, do not introduce them into the catheter, but remove them from the border and from the album of the urine.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And perform surgery on the patient over the table, rub the affected area with oil and a mixture of honey and water, using olive oil and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And insert the catheter to facilitate its passage until it reaches the tip of the honey; and then fold the catheter over the abdomen; and then push the catheter through that; and then push it through until it reaches the bladder, and that is when the patient should be able to urinate, and if this is not done in this order, but rather forced, it will cause twisting.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly pull out the catheter with the small thread, as the urine soaks the thread.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then remove that and do for the cure of urine, use a catheter, do not stop doing that and use a catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient is again relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 99.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of bladder irrigation with a catheter and similar instruments that are suitable for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulcers or abscesses occur in the bladder, or it is constricted by swelling, and you want to drain fluids and medications from there, then use an instrument called a cystoscope, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but it has a hole on its outside, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three parts: two from one side, as needed.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning is a container, in which that which is inserted is placed, and it has two quantities that correspond to it, its addition, until when any cause is drawn from there, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, the liquid is drawn, and when it is expelled long, according to what the cystoscope is made of, which is made of pitch in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So when you want to draw fluids from the bladder, insert the end of the cystoscope into the liquid, and draw that liquid which is inserted into the parts above, where the liquid is drawn into the container of the cystoscope.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then, before entering the catheter into the urethra as recommended in the circle; and then, apply moisture with that water, which moistens the bladder at first, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the thin catheter by which the bladder is catheterized, and that is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or tin, of which the tip is similar to a small feather, and then the canal is inserted into the bladder.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then, take the bladder in motion, and place it in that moisture which you want to catheterize into the bladder, and then tie it strongly with a double thread, and boil that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then, insert the tip of the catheter into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then, place your hand on the bladder with that moisture which has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if the bladder is not present, then take a pestle of pumice stone and make a circle from it; and perforate it throughout its entire surface; and then insert a strong thread through those tracks, as it is turned; and then add the circle where it is also added, so that you wait in that water which you want to catheterize into the bladder, and listen and observe.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then approach that with the instrument and do as you did with the bladder, and express the moisture into the bladder through your hand.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of stone extraction.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the previous section the types of stones and their cures with medicines, and the difference between stones that form in the kidneys and stones that form in the bladder, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have mentioned the stone that requires surgical intervention and incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone that forms in the bladder itself is the one that gets stuck in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will explain it with a clear and concise explanation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it is said that stones that form in the bladder mainly occur in children; and among their symptoms is that the urine that is excreted from the bladder resembles water in its fineness, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels pain in the lower back, and then becomes paralyzed; and at that time, they often feel pain in the groin.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is the cure of children who have reached fourteen years old, and it is difficult to treat the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In young people, it is considered that for this reason, they are between those who have not reached their full growth.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that one where the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is less, it is contrary to that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we reach the cure of that one, we begin with the beginning of that which they call the crister, which extracts all the fistula, which is in their intestines; because that fistula sometimes prevents the passage of the stone due to its investigation.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then press the crister against their feet and be careful and make them lie down in such a way that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it falls out from some other place.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that cerec between your hands prepared, and the hands of the patient should be placed on the things of the patient, so that the bladder is completely made to lean down to the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then bring that entire portion of cloth.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the stone in the space, then immediately apply pressure to it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not remove all of the dust from your hand, then apply some oil to it on the left side of the patient's back, if the patient is a child, or on the right side if they are an adult, and insert that into their rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And then bring that stone out through the same opening where it was inserted.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually introduce it into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that from the left side of the patient's body, and expel it through the same opening where your hand was.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press on the bladder with their left hand; and command another assistant to extend their right hand over the patient's thighs, and their left hand to remain against the perineum, which is between the thighs, in the part where the incision was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then introduce a pointed instrument through the same incision, which has this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut in that place between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle, towards the left side of the cushion; and the section should be on the stone and the titled "in the buttocks", and make a transverse section, so that the exposed section is wide and tight according to the quantity that the stone can hold, and not more, because if the titled stone is forced to hold the section, it will lose its functionality.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is a stone among them that has an angle and margins, so that the exit of it is made difficult by that.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that one is like a lion's claw, round, and made of stronger material exit.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is the one with angles and margins, adjust it in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not forced to hold the section, then cover that, or strengthen it with a decent gesture, the end of which should be like a razor that strengthens on the stone, and does not slip from it; or insert it behind the subtle instrument with curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do it on that one, then slightly increase the size of the opening, and if you want to draw out pus, cut strongly through that with a strong vitreous needle.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you push the finger into the mouth of the bladder, and then incise over it; and then push a little more of that; and similarly do if they are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is known that you should incise that with a large section, which causes one of two things to the patient: either death or that they develop a continuous drip of urine, because the area is not completely solid.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	If you administer expulsion of it before it is fully formed, or engineer in the fracture of it with the forceps before it is extracted in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and strongly that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place that cloth soaked in oil or oiled and wet with water, to prevent the abscess from spreading.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then place the patient on their back on their own pillow, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When those airs have been removed, rub the area with water and oil, and care for that wound with daffinicon and diabazilicon until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if an abscess has formed in the wound, it is hard and corrosive, and if it is similar to one that is in the bladder frozen, and for that there is a prohibition of urine (and that is known as the exit of the wound with urine), then enter the said tool into the wound and extract that wound, because it can cause the bladder to corrode and putrefy.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with warm water and vinegar, water and salt, and with all opposition to that special one, with that which is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover all the patient's body with cloths and adjust the medicines that are placed on the affected area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the urethra, and it is stuck there, and urine cannot be discharged, then use this remedy to reach cure, as many troops are used for this treatment and it is called cure; and I have already extracted it, and you should take a small iron needle with a hook like this:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular shape, sharp, inserted into the urethra.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a soft, flexible catheter and place it behind the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the urethra, piercing it until the hook reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then rotate the hook in the stone little by little, and you will pierce the opening of it until you make the other side penetrate; as the urine is already released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then place your hand on that area where the stone of the urethra is located, which is usually soaked in urine, and the patient is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	However, if this cure cannot be performed for some reason that prevents you from doing so, then place two fingers below the stone and two above it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then push on the stone in that urethra between two grooves.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then remove the bandage and change the dressing, which is made in the abdomen.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to place a bandage below the stone, but rather to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage above should be placed so that when the first bandage is removed, the edge of the stone does not return to its place and cause infection.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that reason, when you remove the bandage above, you should lift the skin on the parts above or return your hand to its original position and place it in the abdomen as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are not commonly formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	However, if one of those has a stone, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden by too many hands.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman is very young and a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who is very skilled and can describe to the doctor whether she has had intercourse with a man when she is chaste, or she is among the women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not have a woman who is very skilled in this art, especially the operation of the abdomen.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the incision over the stone in women is longer than the location of the stone, so it is necessary to make an incision beforehand, and in that place there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	However, if you need to do so, make sure to get a very skilled woman who is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are not privy to that, then consult a skilled and subtle physician, or present a well-educated and experienced midwife, or a woman who has knowledge in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then make that person present, and command them to do everything you instruct them to, from the examination of the stone until its removal; this is because it is necessary to check if the woman is a virgin, then cover the same area with a cloth and ask for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if that person is found, cover them with a cloth, and then command them to incise over that area.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If they are not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert the same area into the cavity of the patient and examine the stone, placing their left hand on the bladder, and carefully observe that area.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if that person is found, gradually moisten the area around the opening of the bladder with the same substance until it reaches the stone in the cavity.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Approach the position of the doctor's chair and place the cushion under it in the same place where it is usually placed, and center the stone in that part, and the doctor should not remain near the cushion afterward.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	The section should be thin at the beginning; and then place the ray over that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the amount of stone that is known to be in that area.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	You should know that the types of stones are varied: some are thin and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know what type of stone is in that area for what you mean by that.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to draw out the sand, place the triangular glass in that location for an hour until it is removed, and then return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure to prepare the tools that are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you can be helped by those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you want to expel sand from the body, and know that the expulsion of sand is through the arch that is embedded, then place powder on the area and loosen that arch and structure, and do not repeat that; leave the stone and do not remove it, for if you do, the patient will likely die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Since the sharpness of the sand has decreased after several days, and the wound has healed, then return to your operation before the stone is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of incision on hernia in the groin.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia in the groin is not more than an accumulation of moisture in the white canal that contains the testicles, which is called the scrotum.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some of them are in the proper panniculus that nature has prepared in the area of the testicles, until it becomes another testicle; and this is the cord of the testicle between the white canal that we have said, and it is not that but scar tissue.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakening of the muscles, which occurs in the groin, so that this matter is pushed into these areas, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow caused by impact on the groin.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has different colors, such as the color of it is declining to yellow or red, or black, or rusty, or is dark and muddy, or is white and watery, and that is what is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one can tell if this water aggregation is of this kind: because if it is in the white blister that we have said, then the abscess gradually declines a little along with the figure of a bird, and appears in the groin, because the humidity comes from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the same skin, then the abscess gradually declines at the part of the bird and appears to be another bird.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the folds of the groin and the white blister, then one should compress it.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the color of the humidity in the abscess, then extract the color of the humidity from the pus that is found in the wound; and if there is any discharge from the wound, judge according to that.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when you come to treat him with iron, first order the patient to be bled if possible, and then examine his chest.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then place him supine on his back for some reason, and place something underneath him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then place yourself on the left side of him, and order the assistant to follow on his right, who extends his hand to one of two latches at the crown of the genitals and at the part of the mirror of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a scalpel and divide the crown of the genitals from the middle position for the length entering into the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the incision straight and equally distant from the line that should be the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white bone, including the cicatrix.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And expel that one, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not injure that one; and your excoriation should be the same as the one that was expelled, which is suspended by the highest part and subtly scrutinized according to the quantity possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then puncture the bottom of the swollen part with a wide needle, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between two lips of the section with the incisions, and extend the swollen part to the parts above; and do not touch the genitals that are contained, and puncture the swollen part in that manner that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And puncture that one at its entirety or in parts, and more subtly than its lateral part, because if you do not scrutinize the incision of it exquisitely, it is not certain that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the wound proceeds from that deformed part of its code in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the swollen part, return again that one, and then adjust the two lips of the code of the genitals with a suture, and then care for that one as with the others until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If the corrupted kidney is also affected by another illness, then first tie the veins that are attached to it, remove the kidney, and then cure that part with what we have mentioned before.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	However, if the water is added in two equal parts, then you will know that two are hernias; therefore, insert that part according to what you have done on the other one equally; and if it seems to be an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you will clean the wound, and insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil or rose oil; and place another piece of wool that you have soaked in vinegar and oil over two genuflections and the miracle of the belly; and place cloths and powders on top of them, and bind them with a bandage according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then place two cloths and fold them according to this form; and make the bandages for the extremities as follows: those that are pressed from the side or from wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the belt of the trousers, and one extremity is taken from behind the buttocks into the two, and the second is taken to the part of the underwear, and two extremities on top of two cushions and two other extremities on top of two angles, and all the structure should be adjusted in the belt of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a pointed cautery instead of natural incision; and you should take a fine-tipped cautery and insert it into the inguinal canal, and ignite it after we have recommended that it be done before the white envelope containing the water is opened, and then you should take the cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then puncture that envelope, and ignite it inside before all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the envelope with your fingers, scrape it with your fingers, and scrape it with a fine-tipped cautery ignited; and insert it as much as possible inside in order to remove everything; and guard yourself from the heat that the fire does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and longer than the operation of incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter resistance to the abscess at the time of incision or at the time of cauterization, or during the drainage of pus, then cover it with a remedy that you can use for that resistance, which is appropriate according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is weak and does not want to undergo the second operation due to its horror, then administer anesthesia as we have recommended; and when you are certain that this hernia is dangerous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then place the patient on a raised cushion, and when you have punctured the abscess in the lowest part of the thigh, cover the puncture according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And make sure that the opening is wide enough for all the water to flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand on that spot and press it down, so that the water continuously flows out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And care for that spot until the infection is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if resistance to the outflow of water at that time, then you should puncture that spot: and this is not done unless the white membrane in the orifices of the wound causes resistance and prevents the escape of water, then place a pen or instrument in the wound from which water is extracted, as described; or adjust a small pressure on the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	When the water returns, and is boiled for several months or in the environment of those; and as it is boiled, then according to that manual method, the patient will pass their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	About incision on fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the incision on this hernia, there is great fear of losing the patient due to severe complications; therefore, I see its dismissal and being saved by that better method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation in that and the signs of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, say that abscesses do not occur in the parts where the joints are formed and it is done for various reasons: either due to excessive acute pain, which is found in the joints, or due to impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And its color is according to the color of the part, and it does not appear in the pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And if the abscess is very hardened, of which the color is dark, and does not move at all.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some varicose veins are caused by the narrowing of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those that already exist, or by the inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	This is called by the dispersion of the abscess when it comes out with the thighs, and does not cause any harm.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	This is also not dispersed by the compression of the thighs, for any reason.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is also possible that on this special case and on the other flesh; and you insert the needle of the genitals, and then pull the cord to the parts above, and extract that from the white cipher, and remove the suspensors of the veins, and tie them, and insert the suspensors as you remove all the parts of the cord.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the cord is already attached to those flesh and has been healed, then you should extract the cord and insert that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the phimosis, or between what is between the buttocks, then you should remove all that adhesion and cut it at the round beginning.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the flesh is native to the place of the adhesion which is behind, then you should cut all that is there, and remove it as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin mixed with rose oil and wine; and then care for that wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the cure of a hernia that is in the thigh.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The thigh is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a bulge, and it is difficult to move and exercise walking on the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease, fear of that which precedes it is remembered.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, they say operation in the second that did the first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that you should place the patient on a raised bed; and then lower the suspensory ligaments of the testicles to their divisions; and then take the spermatic cord of the genitals and pull it towards the thighs, which are spread wide apart; and have another assistant hold those parts, and extend them forcefully.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert a sharp, narrow knife diagonally through the right side of the veins where the veins are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scrape off all the parts where we have said to remove the cartilage in the extraction of bones, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert a double-pointed needle in those places, and thread the first one into the first of the locations where we have made incisions, and thread the other one through the last of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert them diagonally through the middle location according to the length of the wound, and extract that which has been added due to the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with the same remedies used to cure other wounds in which you wish to generate healing by causing the vessels that do not cause harm.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if it happens that all the vessels are affected, then cover them with a cloth so that the testicles are extruded or that the testicles are crushed by the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the beginning of the vessels, and that they are stabilized, or that something happens so that it is not harmful to those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the treatment of intestinal hernia
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen from the angles of the stomach, causing the intestines to protrude from any part of the rupture.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the abdomen or of the intestine, and these two species occur due to various causes: impact, strain, coughing, or lifting a heavy cause, or by similar means.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	When the swelling of the joints is caused by prolonged exposure to cold, it occurs gradually over time and does not happen suddenly, and it is a boil that enters the body when the joint compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	When the swelling of the joints is caused by dryness, it initially causes severe pain; and it is a boil that appears differently from the usual boil, and this is due to the intestine, and the cause of the joint pain is from the parts of the joint.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Sometimes, when the intestine is pulled out through the abdominal wall, it is called this inguinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Sometimes, when the intestine is pushed out due to windiness, and sometimes it tears in the intestinal opening, and it is held there, and this is a great pain for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain and more so when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this illness, iron is used with fear, because it causes vomiting, so it should be avoided in that case.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation is that you command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with your hand at the parts of its cavity and obey its return, and then place it on his neck between your hands, and raise his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then place the cord that is the cord of the testicles at the parts above, and insert the cord of the testicles completely through the long; and then place two fingers of the section second to those that should open the section to them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that is possible to be cut from that, it should be opened.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape that which is below the cord of the testicles, until it is discovered white from each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then introduce your finger in that which is the testicle, in that which is between white cipher, which is below the cord of the wound, and between the cipher second, and solve that adherence which is in the part behind the wound.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And approach the patient's groin to the divided parts, and apply a white cloth on his left side, and raise the abdomen towards the right part; and command the assistant to extend it, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind after the solution is completed.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And cover the patient's feet with a blanket, so there is no cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white cloth during surgery.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause, then you should apply it to the abdomen behind.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And approach with a needle that is strong and thick, and insert it from the back of the abdomen, which is where the uterus is located, and insert its extremities, which are about four fingers long, and place a support on them in the shape of a cross; and tie that to the abdomen from which we have said that it is behind the uterus and close to two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the feet with a strong bandage until some of the veins that nourish those cannot transmit any cause for which apostema does not occur from here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another bandage along the second line, three fingers away from the first; and then leave these two bandages on the scrotum, which is placed behind the testicles, according to the size of the patient, and insert it completely with rounded edges, and then remove it.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then insert it into the part behind the scrotum, which is divided by a section that runs through healthy and unhealthy tissue as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer submerged wool in oil, and place it on the affected area; and administer the bandage that we have recommended (and some white bandages of the scrotum are cauterized, which we have said to place at the beginning of the temen of healthy tissue, because some bandages accidentally affect those) and leave the bandage until it falls off.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the patient's feces are delayed, then apply a warm water enema, and place your hand over that area after it has been expelled.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the wound with the other remedy for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of strangulated hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, no one has seen anyone who has been cured of it without iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that is visible; the thing is that you should tie the veins near the section of the body; and then dry in the middle area around the abscess, which causes that, until the veins fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the dislocation that is made in the legs.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some people have a rupture in the legs as we have said, and they point to the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not attribute any cause to the hernias in the groin; and if you do, that is rare; and it returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged, then a slit is made in the scrotum before the hernia returns; and this is caused by the extension of the scrotum, which is as we have said, the cause being that the scrotum is stretched, and it becomes soft and the area becomes inflamed and swollen.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure of this is with a pointed cautery as we have previously described.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some wounds are cured with iron in this way: and that is that the patient lies on their back between your legs, and you grasp the area of the inflamed and swollen apostemas with a section according to the size of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then apply a white linen cloth that is pulled through the inguinal canal to expose it.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the ray and place it over the inflamed area of the scrotum, and press it against the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then approach the two incisions on the outer part of the thigh, and adjust one of them to the other with sutures.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then remove the outer part of the thigh, and do not incise the abdomen from all sides, nor stretch the intestine, nor any other cause that you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then care for that in the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the wounds, clean it and restore the wound before it is consolidated; because the abdomen contracts and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, as it is more likely to bring about healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the cords of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	The cords of the testicles in some men are softened because the tissues that are between them are softened, and the discharge from it is treated accordingly.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for that person who is preparing to treat it to make the patient lie on their side, and incise the entire cord which is softened over the natural cord; and then adjust two flaps over the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If you wish, use three or four sutures or a firm stitch to close the excess of the softened sinew at the beginning.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then insert between the stitches; and cure by treating the other affected areas so that they heal and the wounds close.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	Of Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but it is allowed for certain reasons as I remember in this book; and it is not necessary to remember of that unless for two reasons, one being that the doctor knows it when he is asked about it, who can cure it; and the other reason is that we have had the necessity of castration of other animals for our uses, such as horses, cows, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore it is said that castration is done in two ways: by traction or by incision and section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	When it is done through attrition, the way of the operation is to make a cut in the animal's tail between its genitals, where they soften and become thinner, and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take those with your hand inside before they are resolved and do not appear from the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	When it is done through incision and section, hold the animal and take the string of its testicles with your right hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then tie the suspenders and make an incision on each side of its belly between two ribs.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then make an incision on those that will be removed from each excoriate.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave any cause on those of the cipher, but remove the subtle one that is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This method of castration is better than the one done through attrition, because attrition leaves no cause of the testicles so that the animal does not want to eat.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then take care of the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the cure of hydrophobia.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hydrophobia in men presents two forms: one is that which appears in the space between the testicles, in the area between the two testicles, a small worm can be found.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some of these worms cause urine that is in the space between the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a special form: the worm of the womb is located above the uterus, with two testicles of a man, a small amount at the bottom of the vagina, and two testicles like those of a man.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three kinds: two from men and one from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you should insert those fleshy parts adjusted into the place where the worm escapes, and then cure those with the cure of other plagues.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second form of men, where the worm is found in the space between the testicles, there is no cure or operation in it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of lens and flesh, prominent by causes of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A strong lens is adjusted according to natural causes until it is stretched and made to fit; and some women are magnified in certain ways within which they spread as in men and perceive during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then cover that you have the excess of lens with your hand or oil and insert it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not end in insertion, mainly in the front of the eye, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then care for that with cure of plagues until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Meat born is meat that was in the horrible of the mother until it fills that, and very often it is seen at the parts deformed according to its (and for that reason they first call this "deformed offspring"); therefore cover that you insert there as you insert a lens, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the treatment of rheumatism.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Rheumatism is when the joints are not perforated or slightly broken.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is caused by a previous illness, and that is made of meat not well adjusted or of subtle or thick fat.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made in the front of the shoulder, or on its sides, or in the upper arm, or in the lower arm, and prohibits movement, engagement, and lifting, and very strongly prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made by regularly looking at the menstrual flow, if the obstruction is obvious, then; but if it is not obvious, then you should look at it with your fingers or with a rod.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is of subtle fat, and it is placed on the two lips, then you should cut and remove that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that placed on the two lips, and then you should place your fingers over the indicated points of the two lips.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman should be on her back, her legs extended, and then gently spread her labia to the extent that the delicate phimosis is broken and the obstruction is removed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take wool and soak it in oil and place it on the wound to prevent the wound from becoming solidified.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the phimosis is large and thick, then cut it with a scalpel or a sharp knife.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the obstruction is made of flesh, then suspend it with a hook and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that stop the flow of blood from wounds due to bites, such as acetic acid, and blood, and earthworms, adjusted with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide-bore catheter to prevent the wound from becoming solidified too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold it for several days and administer honey.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then heal it with the other method of healing until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes certain accidents occur in the greater native land of other flesh, and it is customary to insert according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	However, if it is for an abscess in the neck, then do not make a puncture at the abscess in the neck in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail, and red boil that occurs in the region of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are considered to be the enlargement of veins that flow continuously from those orifices; and since hemorrhoids are treated thus.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of those species and their symptoms, and to say whether those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore say that hemorrhoids and tail when they are in the region of the greater and do not appear to the touch, then in those it is not customary to treat with a needle.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	May those who are in the highest parts of the body above which the cat senses, are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And cover that you put the needle in a moistened place and approach the forceps or the sharp cloth, and insert those into the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And approach the powder on those from one of the powders that are inserted for biting, like acacia and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And soak the feet in cold water for an hour, and then place that in hot water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then make that with a decoction of wormwood and saltpeter and vinegar and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And approach take flour of ordinary and mix that with honey and vinegar and make a paste from that on the back of it.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is separated, good; and if not, make it stick to both bandages, and at the nipples are the incisions.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And approach take wool and immerse that in the juice of colianders or in the juice of arnagloza or in the juice of guarravier and vinegar and make it stick to the place; and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May you ask for a sharp instrument that is usually used, so that you can cut through it as I have described in the previous section.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And heal that wound which has been treated.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the perforation of an accidental wound in the thigh.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Special notes on accidental abscesses in the thigh, including cranke, abscess, ulcers, adhesions, erpetomenes, fistulas, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already described these diseases and their symptoms, and their treatments in the previous section.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And you should know that in this treatise on abscess, the one that occurs in the thigh when it is one of the abscesses that collides with healthy tissue, and if you want to know how the operation for it is performed with a knife.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain of the abscess in its initial stage is sharp with percussion and swelling, and sometimes it feels like it is on fire, and if you feel that sensation, then do not perform the incision immediately, and treat that which helps to stop the maturation inside until the severity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then you should do the following: place your hand on her breast over two pillows; and lean back on her back and adjust her feet to the part of the bed closest to the stomach, and her thighs should be spread, and her arms should be placed under her head, and a blanket should be placed over her conveniently.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should follow behind the left side and administer the instrument that is placed in the opening of the mother, the form of which will come in those causes that will be appropriate.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, you should place yourself on the right side of the mother's bed, and that which enters into the mother should not be more than the length of the mother's bed and should not harm the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is longer than the length of the mother's bed, then you should place cushions on the surface of the mother's bed so that the instrument is not allowed to enter entirely into the mother's body.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And then you should place the vertebra that is on the left side of the instrument above and that the administrator should hold the instrument and rotate the vertebra until it is placed in the opening of the mother.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the incision is made, it is touched with the hand and lion's saliva, and then you should remove that piece of cloth from under his head with a spoon.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, place your hand in a basin of rose-scented or unscented oil to prevent infection; and hold the knife in the section where the main blood vessel is.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And then cover the wound with clean, wet cloth that has been soaked in water in which vinegar has been built up.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be cured after two days with the appropriate medicine that is suitable for that wound to heal.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some herbs are washed in the wound and the area around it with honey and water, and then with water in which horsehair or long Arabic roots have been boiled, and then return to the medicine.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deeply embedded in the flesh, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, having care for that which we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to best treat pregnancies that are not in the natural form.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary for the midwife to know the natural form of pregnancy from experience, and when you see the woman expelling parts before and after, and desiring to smell the air, and above that is a sign that this part is not in the natural form, and the presentation of the fetus on its own head, and the second position is hanging or suspended from the umbilicus.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see these signs, cover the abdomen of the woman so that the fetus can slightly move forward as it comes out over its own head, and the second position is born, and it is said that these excess movements are a good delivery.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	However, if this part is not natural and unusable, because when the fetus is born over its own feet and the body of the woman is facing forward, and the back of the woman is one, or at the foot of the woman, or the head of the woman is born and the back of the woman, or on the abdomen of the woman, and it is greatly turned over its own collar, and similar to the unusable figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	When necessary, the cause is often attributed to the woman who is wise and subtle in all these causes, and who guards against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And by showing all the figures of those things, one can understand what is happening in them and how it relates to that and stands on that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When it is done, it is placed on the patient's head for natural relief, and that is very strong on the woman and is done at that difficult part, sometimes the power of which has been weakened, then do that sweating, or what the women had before, and evaporate the condensation from the patient with fenugreek tea and warm oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then insert the midwife between her legs and loosen that second skin, or dry it with her finger until that water is removed from it.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly until the child is born.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If not, then cover the woman with a mixture of mud and fenugreek tea.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command the patient, approach the crucifix, and ask them to be calm and make that sign of the cross; and close their mouth and nose for an hour, so they can die quickly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the patient's breaths are often interrupted at the beginning, then gradually reduce those facilities little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if they do not obey the instrument, then place your hand on their chest and lift their feet up, and gradually lower the sheet to the ground; and the hand should be held so that it does not fall during the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the breaths are not returned and the patient dies, then insert those and remove the remaining body of the patient or place their body in the lap of the one who is with them and remove that equality, because that person will die quickly.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the position of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the patient is lying on its feet, then gradually push those upwards, and gradually turn the patient small, and gradually make them equal to that, and gradually take one of their legs and extend it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When they are lying between the thighs, then command them to express themselves, and make that extraction as gentle as possible, for it is a delicate matter if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if that is not possible, then gradually return the small child back into its natural second figure, as it would be more appropriate and gentle.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is completely prohibited, then take some mucilage of flax and dissolved gum, and grind it well in the mortar for good percussion, and apply that to the woman's private parts, at the bottom of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that into a ceruse in rosewater, until it reaches its proper consistency.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts left of them are softened, then do the sublimation of myrtle and sub-pause that to them.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sublimation lasts for an hour, then make that into a powder on a plate, and then perform the extraction of the mouth of them, and lift it from there, and press the lowest part of their belly gently, as it would be more appropriate.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Eyssiment of the child on his back and his hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the child is placed in this position, then gradually insert your fingers into his hands; place the woman's hand on his back, and his feet downward, and those should be on the side, and complete his hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And gradually place pressure on his belly, and gradually remove what is placed under his feet from the straw before he is prepared in the part of the body.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the child is not moved, then take his feet and move those parts with great force, and gradually place pressure on what is over his hypochondriac region until the child can move the parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And gradually insert his hands and equalize the child little by little, and command the woman to express herself until the child is moved.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Lay the child flat on his back with one of his hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Gradually reduce the child's abdomen, but if you cannot do that, then raise the woman and let her do it.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If the patient cannot move, then perform the jazzer on the left side, and shake the cushions under him vigorously, and administer medicines that you have and recommend from opiates.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If the child is born, then perform that serer on the ceramic, and study the reduction of the umbilical cord, and equalize the feet according to the natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to know if she has expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The child is on its back, with its arms extended and the surface of its foot at the two o'clock position of its mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife holds the umbilical cord of the child and gradually turns it, and that facilitates.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is equalized, pause over the womb of the child that you have recommended from oil and opiates.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command the woman to gradually expel, and when you have done that, perform that serer on a ceramic and command her to be inclined on her left side, and then command her to be comfortable; and make the woman sneeze again.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The outcome of the prepared fetus on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the second bone of the upper arm is cut by this method, consider, and then you insert the second finger into it until it is drained of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then you insert it into the abdomen to prevent it from being retained and decaying.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then apply the fetus to the parts that are inside until you place the second one in the vagina, and tell the woman to understand some signs, and if the man is not ready, may God will.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that the movements of twins are not natural, and some last three or four days, but this is strange and does not happen; rather, it is a cause by nature, and not a living thing.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, even if they are multiplied, one second finger, and they are separated by a cipher, distinguish those within the ligament in the navel of each of those, and some signs are not ready as it is a fetus that is naturally alive, and its position has some signs that are not acceptable as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If it is difficult to remove them from their position and they reach the point where we have mentioned about the unnatural figures, then cure those as we have described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife skillfully and performs what facilitates and subtly, and quickly, and is intelligent according to all figure according to what is prepared by the engineer leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women are formed in the womb in one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more ten, and it is already verified that a woman aborts not until the sixth, and another all formed, which cause is made because of the glorious savior.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this knowledge should be in the science of the midwife that is very useful for that appearance similar to that, and therefore pauses to that which is known.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you are treating a dead fetus that we have mentioned in the division of medicine and it is not deformed, and if you find it suitable to use an operation with your hand, then consider whether the woman has healthy virtue and is not affected by any of the accidents by which she is feared for perdition.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be placed on her left side, with her head inclined to one side and her legs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the assistant should hold the woman's hand or place it on her left side to prevent the fetus from extending during extraction.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the mother's mouth with oil and a mixture of mint, fennel, and sesame seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And the midwife should place her hand on those oils and mixtures, and place her hand in the mother to facilitate the birth, and surround the area where the umbilical cord is in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	In those places: then you consider whether the fetus is prepared to be born on its own head, and then you look for the umbilical cord in its neck, or in its collarbone, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its beard, or in its shoulder blades, or in the places proper for the ribs, or under its hypochondriac regions.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the disease is on his feet, then in the fifth vertebra, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And hold the needle with your right hand, and press the curve of the patient in that place between the teeth on his left side, and insert your left hand to facilitate and keep the needle in any of those places we have mentioned, until you reach the cause of the pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and hold another needle or the third one if necessary, so that it is attached equally, and not stretched more than necessary.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it should be done at all parts, so that the incision of the patient is as it is done in teeth for the elimination of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And in that place where the extension is softened; and if any part of it is held, then hold that midwife's oil and insert those experiments and rotate those that are held.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the child is forgotten, then move the needles to a place that is more painful; and do so until the whole child is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the limb is lying across the other and it is not possible to reduce it by traction, then cover that part with a cloth; and then remove all the flesh until everything is removed, and insert it or in the joint of the limb or into the cavity.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And if you do this in the other limb and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the bone is large, or if it has been injured in the traction, or if it is adjusted at the edge of the bone, then insert between these spicules and cut the head and remove the water, or dislocate that with an instrument called “alundat”, the shape of which will come from the shapes of the other instruments in the capital, which is appropriate for this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Similarly, if the bone is naturally large: and then insert that with a mallet, or take that with an instrument called “alundat”, as we have said; and then remove the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is exposed and tractioned by the furcula, then cut through where the moisture that is in the chest is found.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated, nor obese, then you should insert the needle as soon as possible according to what is possible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the area of the belly is abscessed or is in a hydrocele, then make an incision where the moisture that is inside flows.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the foot is above the other, then the position of the leg is elevated and the direction of the leg to the mouth of the major vein is elevated.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the belly and chest are compressed, then make an incision where the cloth that has been wrapped around your hand flows from inside.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are still and the patient returns to consciousness, then insert the hand on the left side; but if the mouth of the major vein is blocked, then insert the hand in the groin, and encircle the area around the head, and throw that hand towards the mouth of the major vein, and then insert an inch or two, and throw the hand towards those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed by an abscess that has occurred to her, then do not force it open; before doing so, first administer an injection of warm, oily humors.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply plasters; and follow the patient in baths that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the wound is on the patient's back, if possible, it should be sharp: and it should be administered what we have said in the live foot.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be scraped off with a spoon, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And do not leave any cause of decay in the second tooth.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure in abscesses that have occurred to the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flow of sanction, then first put in stoppage baths and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And if you have already seen a woman in the belly of whom was made dead, and then another begun, and then the dead one is the other one.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to him after a long time that he had an abscess in his belly; and when fire was brought, he began to groan loudly.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And he was called for his care, and he was treated for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then he placed some strong-adhesive plasters on him for various reasons, and he placed an object in his stomach, and after several days, he placed another object; and he was very surprised because there were no bones in his belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then he thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	And then he followed the wound, and he extracted some bones from him, which were existing in his intestines in various dispositions, and had been there for a long time, correcting him of a little groan.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And he did not doubt that this was strange, but rather that in this there was knowledge and help for him from the skilled doctor who administered the medicine for his cure.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of tools needed to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of a spoon that is used to open the mother's womb:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a forceps in which the free parts are gripped, to which grip there are two spoons at both ends of two handles.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this spoon should be more subtle than a constrictor, and it should be made of either iron or wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each handle should be two fingers wide, and the margin of each end should be one finger wide, and the length of each should be a palm and a little more; and in the middle of the two handles there are two adjustments of that measure tool, which are already fixed, of which the length is the greatest of one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments are inserted into the mother's mouth so that they can be opened when you turn those two prescribed spoons.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to that one, more subtle and deceitful:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of wood or bone, according to the resemblance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the end of it has two additions like sometimes, and the length of those additions is one palm, and the width of each is two digits.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the larger one, then you make a cushion on the lightest part of the feet hanging down, and place that which is between the patient's thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then bring your hand with the instrument according to the amount you want of the approximation of the mouth of the larger one that the midwife makes so that you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of the verticality that the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of the impeller that is pushed against the fetus:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of the amidist that is held against the large head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps at the end of which there are teeth sometimes, and some of them are made long according to this form, sometimes, to which there are teeth at the end of which is sharpened and held.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of administration for a few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a single drop with a needle:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a single drop with two needles:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps that has a closed jaw and is used to hold the head of the fetus:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula with two ends, where the head is removed:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two flat spoons:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercised, and when more are multiplied in species of that and prepared by the artisans, it is lighter to their operation and also easier for the women because of their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not neglect to have those instruments ready, because the need for them is not excuseable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	For extraction of the second tooth.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second tooth is held, then command the patient to hold their tongue, and do that condition, and strengthen your hand on the mouth of it and on its nostrils, and if by force it does not succeed, then it is.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take an olive oil and perforate the skin with a sharp tool, and place it on those herbs burning near the mouth of the mother, such as calamint, rue, and camomile, and Arabic and cassia lignea and santonica.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the oil, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a cannula of cane in the mouth of the mother, and hold that inside until the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then do that steaming as we have said, and the second time remove it quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this treatment is not effective and does not help, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of althea, and then enter it into the womb and massage it the second time, and when that has been found, then take it and extend it little by little if it is attached to the belly of the mother, then enter her second hand as we have recommended, and when it has found the second time, extract it little by little correctly so that the mother does not suffer from the violent attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Aboard a ship that is moving to the right or left for ease of movement.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of attraction so that it obeys and avoids adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the main is covered, we have already recommended the cure with steam and medication from the root of the herb.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	However, if all the causes that we have recommended are not forgotten, then guard yourself that you do not fatigue that which exists within the patient to the mouth of the main, but rather cover it with a cloth and apply a poultice made of egg yolk and tetrafarmacon; for this will cause it to dissolve and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	However, when it poisons, it is lifted up to the head and stomach, and that harms the patient; and therefore cover it with sub-fumigations and appropriate remedies for that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	However, the ancients have already discovered fumigation with nitrates and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an instrument by which a woman is sub-fumigated for the retention of menstruation and secondina.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of cloth or linen.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the narrow end should be placed under the cauldron and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that one until the fumigation is consumed and repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the cure of the child's anus not pierced.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When newborn children and their anuses are not pierced, which have been sliced thinly and covered with a bandage.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then ask the midwife to pierce that sliced part; and if not, pierce that with a sharp knife, and make sure it does not touch the tail.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place that soaked in wine and oil; and then cure that with the salve inside it is empty.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it will be covered, then place a tube in the trunk to remove days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it has happened that the abscess of the anus is formed for the consolidation of a plague or an abscess; then cut open that consolidation, and cure it with the same remedy and ointment that we have mentioned for the cure of the plague and the pus.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the treatment of fistulas that occur thereafter.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the buttocks, with their wide opening and large size, which occur before or in the space of one buttock.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or a sinus.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And if that opening is old and comes from the moisture of white or thin pus, and some wounds are from these fistulas, some penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by the fact that they exist for the escape and for the windiness; and some use the patient's back for the escape, and often it exists from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some wounds are from these fistulas in the space that penetrates into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and some penetrating into the joint and into the back of the thigh.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And this is known as a penetrating or non-penetrating fistula, which means you insert your finger into the anus, and then carefully introduce a thin wire or iron rod into the fistula when it does not have turgidity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	And if there is turgidity in that place, then carefully introduce a thin wire or a thin piece of horse hair into the fistula until you feel the wire or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel it throughout and do not proceed with any cause of constipation, vomiting, or diarrhea, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then treat it accordingly.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meatus of the urethra, then the meaning of that is urinary incontinence, and it is prohibited to have that location treated with medicine so that it can be consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	And if it penetrates into the joint or into the bone and causes pain in the circle, then know that the wire should be inserted through this way if there is no turgidity in the bone, and if there is pain in the circle of the part; and that from there, it may often recur; and that it does not work in that medicine, nor is it consolidated with oil.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all these penetrating fistulas, there is no cure for all of them, and the cure for those is hard work and waiting for the doctors' advice on which one to choose.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In those that are not penetrating and not ancient, healing is delayed according to what you advise, and that which has already been tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And if the patient moves between your hands over his side and raises the cushions of him inside, the cushions should be inclined towards the patient's belly, and then insert a probe, or if it is in the fistula tortuosity, enter where you know the location.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that feeling is around the belly, then cover it with your hand and insert your finger into the belly.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already when it is inserted, another thing that you feel between your hand and that side or flesh, then you know for sure that that is penetrating; and then do not treat in that, because it is not in that healing, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	May it be said that this is a disease that affects men in their cartilage.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment that is expected to work well in this case, you should use a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and introduce that fire into the fistula until it reaches around the bone; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all the adjacent fistulas have been adjusted and healed, which resemble quills of a goose.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then care for those wounds wrapped in a bandage until all those healed flesh has been covered, and then care for those medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, it will not be healed at any time by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the tent goes in and does not penetrate into the place that is on the buttocks, and between that and the tent there is a piece of flesh or a cushion, and the fistula is in that place which is on the surface of the bone, then dry the bone from the beginning of the fistula, and if you see that the drying is done, and it is in the fistula until the extension of the tent reaches the place where the end of the tent is, and through the tent it is released and cautery.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulas that are gathered around the pen needle and do not have any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If blood flows from the wounds that occur when you perform those incisions, then let it flow and use a sharper instrument to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, because the cauterizing iron adjusts well: it stops the bleeding of those incisions and the drainage of the pus from the wounds.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure those callosities that are wrapped in a cloth or cause a trissat within the place where the bone is broken, and then cure the plague by applying hard meat that generates and consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines have stoptic properties and drainage; when it is restored, it is healed and there is no risk of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula has already passed through the anus and is elongated from the surface of the rectum, then enter the finger into the anus and investigate that one.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if the patient's skin is thick or fleshy, and it is placed for penetration, at that time it is not an operation in them but a second way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause of this is to administer in them one of the three ways: either to cauterize that which we have said; or to separate that which you can reach through the cavity of which you have mentioned, so that it is possible for you to introduce those things and the proposed cure, and not process more because of a section in order that you do not pierce the skin containing the intestines, and that something happens on the patient and immediately after the procedure; and then cure that which we have said that four times it is successful; or to lengthen that covering and moisten that puddle which separates that incision from the cul, as we have said, or by that tent or another sharp instrument, and then moundify those fistulas which are in the section through the intestines which you can percrustacio; and then force yourself to make the restoration of the whole plague of the section, and if the opening underneath is not consolidated, and remains open in the part of the cul, and is more painful for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is closed in this manner: when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is around the surface of the anus and on the edge of the anus, then take a perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the wounds in this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert it into that soft envelope of wool or around those; and then insert the tent into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates near the edge of the anus, then you extract the wool from that part where you introduced your own thread into the anus; and remove the end of the wool and adjust both ends, and let it rest for a day or two, and when more of the wool is inserted into the flesh, then remove those parts of the flesh that are between the two ends of the wool and that which can be removed.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then care for the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifices of the fistula are not penetrable, then make them so, in whatever way you have prepared, but ensure it is not too sharp to scratch the skin; and then introduce something into that which is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatula used to open the fistula: its curvature is sharp on one side and flat on the other, so that it does not scratch what is not necessary, sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	For sutures of hernias where there is blood at their beginning.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hernias can occur in two ways, either between the buttocks like this, or with a grainy appearance, as if they were made of rice.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those, some are small and large, and their blood comes from them immediately and is one, and its moisture, and its surface on the buttocks, and in their extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that have their surface on the buttocks according to the few moisture, from which there is a yellowish or a little blood, and its appearance is continuous, and its color is like that.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is stuck in the womb is that you command the patient to lie down and breathe deeply until the womb opens and the stones appear before your eyes.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you sit and hold the instruments that you have with your hand, and then incise those ribs.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the instruments are not held well in those places due to their moisture and softness of those, then take those with a rough cloth or a cotton or a piece of woolen fabric, and extract those with the tweezers, and then incise those and sprinkle some powder caudas on the incision, so that they are in place of a cauterizer; or cauterize those as prescribed in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the womb does not open to egress, then crestericize the patient with a cresteric that has a small bite, and then wash it with that water which is in the womb and which opens egress more easily when the patient expels.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the swollen parts deform the anus, the cause is usually fecal matter, so you should remove it with your nail or with a blade, scrape it off, and then cure it with what we have mentioned before they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And that one who comes first should administer a suture according to this method: take a needle and insert it into the swollen part, then remove the swelling from the upper parts, and make the needle penetrate into the other part, wrap the two ends of the thread on the part behind the needle, and longitudinally; then tighten the swelling against the structure strongly, and tie the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Do this to all of them, and leave one uncovered, so that the excess blood flows from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place a cloth soaked in warm rose oil or wax on the anus, and place that on the chest and command the patient to lie down.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that one in the box; and when it is healed, cure those wounds with ointment or other medication until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Vegetable abscesses that occur due to dryness of the wound or by nature's constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if you do not have those things in that medicine, then cover those with a sponge or your finger into which they are moistened and hold the scab of the pus above, which prevents them from consolidating; and then cure those that are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And then apply those with very strong pus that the first one enters and are excoriated; and then cure those that are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of almsamen, it is clear.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that almsamen, it is clear, and not if it does not redden like the color of chilblains, and it is made throughout the body and especially in the parts below the feet and the feet, and it is caused by those pains of the body.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then cut that which is inside the nail, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its root; and then care for that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the second one that precedes in its head.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Warts are small, hard, round, open sores on the surface of the skin, and they often appear in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And its treatment is to extend or cut that one, or to remove it with forceps or a needle.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize that one, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they have already been removed both ways with the instrument that I have said.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Ants are small, hairy or large open sores on the surface of the skin, and when they bite there is a sting in that place, and it is made around the skin like the bite of an ant.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And its treatment is to grasp a needle made of quill or of thorn, and it should be strong, and place that ant over the ant within the circle of the needle's parts; and then rotate your hand with the needle through which you have cut that which is inside the ant's circle, and place it in the flesh, and remove the ant from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do so with a hollow or iron needle according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part of the needle above the canula should be thin, unperforated, wrapped by someone who knows how to apply the appropriate pressure and make the necessary rotation.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the wound according to what is mentioned in the cautery of ethylene in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are used to give anesthesia.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some anesthetics are made of silver or lead or melted or malleable; and some anesthetics are made of those instruments small and large according to those that are used, such that the one administered in the treatment of small children is small; and of those whose tongues are free or doloyrous, the anesthetics of those are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small anesthetics:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The end of the needle above the canula should be wide according to this method; and at the distance where the bag is tied, it should be as follows.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the rope, which is inserted into the anus, should be as thin as a lion's tail; and on one side of the leg, it has two knots, and on the other side, one knot, and the width of the knot should be according to the size of the rays and a little thicker.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines of the bladder of an animal or sheep's wool are placed, and the lid of it is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced by a thin thread as it is wound; and if the space between the knots is the largest of them.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And enter those knots firmly with a firm cord of fine silk, or around them; and adjust the bag; and when it is placed in the bag, it should be straight in the head of the crucifix between two distinct strong coils, and crucify each knot: But the quality of crucifying that is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which should be scalded according to the amount of the patient's tolerance; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be placed on their back, and their thighs raised and supported by a pillow or blanket; and then apply an ointment made of oil or albumen of egg or mucilage of fenugreek or a similar substance to the anus to facilitate evacuation, and the assistant should hold the basin and express the contents until it is all evacuated from the intestine; and then remove the basin and the patient can lower their thighs to the side.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine does not work as expected, hold it for as long as possible; and if sleep comes to the patient during the night, it is better to keep them lying down.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you insert the patient in the bed of those with abdominal pain and the application of medicine, then repeat the cautery until they are healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are fistulas or abscesses in the anus, then use a thin and sharp lancet from the lancets that infants are cauterized with.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the cure of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	It has already been said in the division of the cure of the plagues that such things were suitable for free people, and it is said thus the cure of those who are sick and treatment according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore it is said that the plagues are diverse according to what causes the plagues and where they occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which wounds are caused that bring about plagues are similar to those of a stone, or an incision with a spike or a sword, or percussion from a lance, or a staff, or a spear, or similar to those of other wounds.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the plagues that are in the body be similar to those that cause fever on the head, or neck, or chest, or abdomen, or thigh, and similar to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And it is mentioned that the cure of some plagues is done by following this reasoning and rule on other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	I will begin with the simple ailments of the head, which will be remembered at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, when a simple headache occurs and is not a fracture, consider this: if it is due to a stone or something similar, and if the neck has only been bathed and is very painful and you fear that the patient may develop an abscess, then first apply leeches to the cephalic region as soon as possible, and do not delay this; and extract them according to the amount of their virtue if no other cause prohibits leeching, especially if the stone that is causing the pain is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if the application of leeches to the opposite side of the affected area is harmful, then protect the patient from drafts and from eating heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If there is any cause that prohibits the use of leeches, then reduce the food intake and do not approach meat or fish.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And if an abscess develops on the affected area, apply a poultice of roasted bread crust or of wine in which has been steeped bay leaves.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are sure of the abscess, pause over the wound, if it is recent and the air has not changed in the same place where you will recommend a small amount of powder.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed there, then pause over the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or is at the beginning of a space and the lips of it are not adjusted by threads, then adjust them according to what I will recommend for the stitching of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound has already been discovered from the bone and the flesh, and it is not retained by threads but only a small suspender, then insert that and care for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to eat foods in which there is grease: caps and form coytes and similar things until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if there is putrefaction in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then insert all of that and drain that, and care for that.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these areas there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow, and it is not removed by medicine, then you should look for the uncut artery, and if you find it, then you should cut it with a sharp instrument or tie it; and if necessity requires that what we have said does not work, then you should cauterize where the blood is flowing.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is easily found; however, you should powder them with this powder, which becomes solid after it has been applied, so that air cannot move them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is as follows: take one part of broken olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of extinguished charcoal; grind all of this into a fine powder, and then fill the wound, and tightly bind it with a good bandage so that it adheres to the wound and coagulates with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then tightly bind it above the wound and leave it in place, do not remove it until it is healed, because the medicine cannot be removed from there until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And some people used to do that alone with cauterization, when it was not in your presence and with a sound mind.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical operation is performed on the large wounds when it is necessary to place it over those and to straighten them, and their recent wounds are sound, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer, then this powder should not be placed in that position, but rather cure those with what we have said, whether you place it on those wounds with digestible ointments, or you place it on those feet with flour of eggs and honey mixed with water; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if an accident occurs to the broken wound in the bone, and it is small, then you extract that with this method.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will direct the cure of the fractures of the head in that which is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the plagues of the neck
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	However, if the plague occurs in the neck, there is no difference in medical treatment, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	However, if the nerves of the neck are cut or the artery, then if it is nerves, not in the engine but that cure of it should be avoided with that which causes strong hemostasis, such as zinc and similar to their quartz and contractor.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place anything over the plague of all blood, because the substance of the nerves is blood and the continuation of it is to the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that which is cured by deceptive medicines, such as washing with warm water, some vinegar in olive oil, rotted or not, and then when it is washed with warm water and the others pearls following this manner, and find humor.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the pain is great, then administer stitching or cut the lips of the wound, and then cure it with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the pain is deep or accidents occur in the lower part of the wound, then pierce it at the most prominent point.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If the pain has already cut an artery and blood flow occurs, then separate or dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent that from happening.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the pain has already cut the spine of the gallbladder or completely, and the veins of the collar are saved, then adjust the wound edges of the codex with stitching on the neck of the gallbladder and do not touch that; equalize it in front and reduce it to its natural shape, and apply a structure decent, and leave it for several days; and then cure it with ointments in which there is stipticitat and excitacio until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the pain has already reached the bones, then prick that area, and if there are fragments of bone, extract all that you can from it; and what is not accessible to you, leave it until the pain subsides, and let the body's own healing process take place.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the pain is recent, then powder that area with the powder that was recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If the pain is caused by a fistula, then cure that area with the ointment that will soon be remembered to come to its own capital.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the neck pains or similar ones that are caused between the ribs and are treated with a spatula, a cauterizer, a lancet, or a similar instrument.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If the pain is caused by a lancet or a cauterizer, and if you consider the depth of the wound, then know that the pain is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth and the pain is recent to its own source, then you place powder on the first hour of the wound, and do not strengthen it so that it does not remain in the depth of the wound and that it returns to the body and that nothing harms the patient, but rather place something attractive there, and remove those bad-smelling dressings.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the vomit is not present, then place your hand on the orifice of the wound to let out that which comes from the humidities; and make the patient lie on their side so that the liquid in them flows out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the wound has passed three days or more without causing spasm, heart pain, or stricture of the abdomen, and if other signs are good, then you can consider the wound to be healed; and then treat that with cold compresses and the other cure until it is fully healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the wound is excused, and it has been opened for a long time, then you can consider it to be a fistula; and therefore treat that by its own capital (or main) method.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by a cut or a gash, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat that with water that precedes stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If there has already been an incision in the bone, and you have already separated it from the surrounding tissue, then twist the plate and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then loosen the tissue that surrounds the plate, which is facilitated by its extraction.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other plates in the other members, the remedy for healing is the same as that which we have mentioned.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plates of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition that occurs in the belly is either large, or small, or mixed.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Some veins in the belly or intestines, so that incision of them and stitching of them is done more forcefully and more subtly.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And small disruption is done difficultly by another method, and it is known that the reduction of them is more difficult, so unless you restrain their incision to their proper place as soon as possible, because they open and swell, making the treatment difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And the best disruption is to move it, since in that case it is not difficult to reduce the hernia, as it is difficult in the two special cases mentioned.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You should know that there are four methods for stitching the belly, but two stitches are common and suitable for stitching other parts of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other types of stitches are common for other parts of the body, but they are more appropriate for the stitching of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I advise you to have each of these exposures and declarations.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore say that when the part is small and there is no cause of the hernia in that case, and it is difficult to reduce it, then one of the two methods mentioned is used: either by patience of the disruption as we have said, or when the hernia becomes inflamed due to the cold of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when that is the case, then cover it with a cloth that you soak in warm water alone, or that you boil in water with salt, pepper, and spices, and apply to the hernia before the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some wounds are made in that place where there is a stoppage, and it is better to use water alone for the resolution of the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which salt and vinegar are dissolved, because for this the instrument of the patient is relieved from pain.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	However, if the instrument of the patient is removed from this cure, then divide the disruption with a small instrument that is not sharp-edged.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first cure is best when it is appropriate that it is not dry, and it is not necessary to occupy it too quickly or inappropriately.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, if its shape is like this:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is sharp-edged, and the other part is not sharp-edged, and its tip is thin, and it is not as thin as a needle, but rather blunt at the end.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, then cover it so that its reduction is according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible over water, because that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is widespread and in the lower part of the abdomen, then let it rest on its back, and place its legs upwards as high as possible; and if it is in the upper part above the abdomen, then place its head and chest upwards as high as possible.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then place your understanding and consideration quickly above it so that the part where the pain is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus, administer this in the major and minor wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the minor wounds, place what is prepared by you between your most skilled fingers, which should hold the disruption completely and adjust its lips, and remove from one to another until some stitch causes another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suture: you take a needle, or count a second needle according to the width of the wound; and leave some distance from the end of the disruption of the said ring, and strengthen the needle once, or do not put it in the two ends of the thread that are on the other side of the part that is behind the thread of the parts that are inside, until you make that penetrate into that part; and you have added two ends of the thread and two ends of the cylinder, and it has been made four times.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then apply strong pressure with the needle in the circle of the needle, and some stitches of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by addition of decency; and then leave the largest of the aforementioned and place another needle in that, and then tie that with the same as the first needle; and do not stop doing this until the needles are all completed inside the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of medium size, because thin needles easily penetrate the flesh; and large ones are difficult to insert into the wound, and therefore it is better to use needles of medium size.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And do not let the needle be stuck at both ends of the wound planned, because the flesh should not be penetrated too easily and the wound should heal before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they should not be prolonged for stitching so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then carefully insert the tips of the needles to prevent the patient from feeling pain; and place cotton balls on the expanded parts of the wound, which hold the tips of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of needle stitches in skilled hands are most suitable for small wounds, as they have one or two or more needles in their stitching.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second stitch is also similar: and you administer the four tips of the needle, two on each side of the cipher, in a row, with a needle that is evenly wrapped in thinness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four tips, reduce the needle from that part of the wound where it began, so that the true retraction of the wound is not too high, and so that the stitch is the second stitch of strong fabric.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch the amount of the thick part of the wound.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch is for women.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And this stitch was used to close the wound that occurred in a man's abdomen, which was punctured with a knife, and it was the rupture of the main wound of a palm, and it was located around two palms from the intestine at the lower part of the member; and then you reduced that because the intestine had been open for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and then it was closed and healed; and after that, apply this ointment for a while, and take care of him.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had thought that he would not be healed; and by a miracle of fire, what you did not close with that wound, which was in the place where the wound was not at all or any medicine, but kept over the wound for two days and abluted assiduously with honey water until the fire healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two types of sutures according to the narrative of Paracleus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And if you begin with the suture of the sinew, and insert the needle from the part of the foreskin to the part of the glans.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so, when the needle penetrates the sinew and the other thread follows the correct and longest path of the whole body, and leave the end of the cord in which you inserted the needle; and let the other end of the thread from the part of the glans to the part of the foreskin in the other side of the penis.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And so, when you have made the other thread penetrate, then make the other thread penetrate in another direction at the other end of the thread from the part of the glans to the part of the foreskin; and leave the end of the cord that is on this side, and let the needle penetrate in the other end of the thread from the part of the glans to the part of the foreskin.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the other thread penetrate in the way that makes the thread penetrate in the cord at the end of the needle, which is in the part where all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin by approaching this patient from the side that is closest to the chin in the other direction, and extract the needle from the codex that penetrates, and then return it to that codex and cover the end of the codex that is on the other side with the extracted part; and extract the needle from the codex that is near it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Do this twice and another time, and do this once more approaching from another direction until you have covered all that is deformed according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The advantage of this method of suturing is that you approach the sutura of pellicies, which covers the wounds, so that you approach the chin once from the side of the end of the codex, and then complete it from the other direction.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second special method of suturing, which is called "Gualia", and this is recommended for use in this case, is that you approach that second semilitut, which doctors cover with that, so that you add all the parts to its corresponding part at the convenient place by nature; and then apply the end of another part to the other end of it, and then do this according to your recommendation.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you have the needle at the end of the mirror, near your own hand, and make it penetrate into the part of the body from that spot, and let two other ends of the cord; and then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from the fore to the other two ends of the cord.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then rotate those needles, and make each one penetrate from the part of the body into the other two ends of the mirror on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suture is better than the common stitching and is the stitching mentioned earlier in this text.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the word of Guillaume.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And moreover, they say that the stitching of the belly is corrected with two needles, so that you insert each one with a true thread, and begin with the insertion of the needle of which you are supposed to use, and make that penetrate into the other side according to the second stitching of those that join the hearts equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when the disruption occurs in the middle of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The diagnosis of plague is judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you obtain the plague recently from the same person who has been exposed to air that alters it, and reduce the intestine and clean it and prepare it inappropriately, then place powder on that fleshy substance.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then place powder on that alcohol which you have present before they make hard and coagulate, and are consolidated and solid; and cure it as is the cure of the other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have the medicines present, then place powder on that as soon as it begins to get warm, cold, and exchange those two vegetables daily, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in cases of simple plagues.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague may spread to the main members, then apply warm linen soaked in quality oil or rose oil, and place it around the affected areas.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, then apply this stinging black ointment, and especially if the poison has reached the intestine and is causing severe pain inside its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You should know that the pus from the large intestine is less dangerous than the pus in the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to cure the intestine known as "genu" because it does not receive any healing from the plague that is in it; and this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, its great length, its thinness, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If that which proceeds from the plague is a thread, and you are able to remove it, then reduce it according to your rightfulness, and reduce the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has passed into the space and is already done correctly or not, then you should apply a firm pressure on the area that is darkened by the patient, so that blood flows from it, as there are veins and arteries in the skin.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert that other thread, and place two ends of the loose skin from the part that is left behind the wound, so that the attraction of the patient's wound can be taken from the cavity of the skin and the emission of the wound discharge.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of wounds that occur in the abdomen.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the abdomen and it is small, it is possible that it can be repaired in some people, because they have seen that one who was wounded in their own belly by percussion of an arrow and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had formed a fistula, and they were able to manage and ventilate it.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then they continued the treatment of it so that it was not considered in the healing of it, but they subtly introduced that which is whole and the area is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And if you have already seen the location that has been consolidated, apply pressure over the patient's abdomen to prevent any further damage; and do not attempt to move them at all for this injury, keeping them in a comfortable position while eating and drinking, and then place them in bed and let them rest.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced doctors have said that when there is an abscess in the intestine, and it is small, you should treat it like this: first, take large needles; then adjust the two lips of the abscess and place one of those needles with the open mouth over the two lips of the abscess; when you place them on top of each other and strengthen your bite, cut off the head of the needle, which adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another needle near the first one, and do not stop doing this until you have done it for each amount of the abscess.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then return that and the abscess to its place; and those needles remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine is torn by a sharp, thin needle attached to it; and you take the end of these needles, which is very sharp, and wrap it around the end of the intestine, then insert those needles into the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing is not other than the second way of faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially in one of the thin intestines, then it cannot be sewn up but only closed, and not healed from all of it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the cure of fistulas and abscesses.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that all wounds and abscesses when they are covered and aged, and become ulcers, and are not consolidated and do not heal over time and are not removed, then, in whatever part of the body it is, universally it is called a fistula, and we call it a sinus.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And in truth, a fistula is a narrow, hard, white wound that does not cause pain and has the same cavity as the cavity of a thorn; and to remember it by that name, it is called a thorn.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in moist people, the wound gets sore; and very often, the moisture is drained away in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is moved, and it is scarce, and thick, and thin, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division, as I said about the plagues, that every wound that is not healed or is not in raw flesh, is not such but for one of these causes: one of which is because of the lack of pus in the wound; or because of the malice of the wound; or because between the wound and the lips there is hard flesh that prevents the natural growth of flesh; or because of the movement of the wound; or because the wound itself is putrid and the matter that is in it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is not suitable for its cure; or when corruption catches in the region, and it is pestilence; or because of the property of the region, like in Saragossa, where digestion of evils is difficult, and healing of apostema by nature is slow; or because there are many or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Here are some of the causes, their symptoms, and the treatment with various medicines in this division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And now I will tell you how to treat fistulas, which are caused by surgical procedures.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; among these, those that reach the great veins, arteries, nerves, intestine, bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the spinal vertebrae, or some joints composed by such composition as is between the hand and foot; and of these, those that are closest to the principal member and similar ones.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And among these fistulas that follow this manner, those are the most difficult to treat and do not receive treatment, and occupation is often due to labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of these fistulas does not reach the locations mentioned above, and you expect and believe in its treatment, and you want to know about it, then take an attempt with iron or fire, and if the fistula goes straight, and you can see it from there.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then use a thin probe to investigate it, as the weight of the body can alleviate and straighten the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is very difficult to handle, it is not possible for you to insert the probe into it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then clean the orifices with their own secretions, as the moisture you use to clean one will spread to the others and infect them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then examine it carefully, according to the method that is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the long fistula or propdan is in its cavity, or whether it is a fistula with many openings that covers everything completely, and whether it causes the patient pain, and whether it is caused by compression of the hand over the area, and similar to the signs and causes of abscesses.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have understood all these causes accurately, then proceed to the cure with confidence: and consider whether it is an apparent fistula near the joint or in a salt location, long from the joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the locations that I have mentioned to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When the wound is dry after the first dressing, and you see that there is pus in that filter and rotten flesh, and that which is born in the orifices of the flesh, or from the intestines and similar parts, and cure it within that time when it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the wound is long and deep, and is in the correct position, then cut it as much as you can, and remove all the rotten flesh; and apply wet dressings in acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the wound, which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that to it for some time until the acute medicine has corroded all that is in the cavity of the wound from the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with the ointments that generate healthy flesh within that time when it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it does not heal by that, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary for you to confirm this, then inquire about that and seal the second one as we have recommended, unless you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member present as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is yours to discover and it is in any corruption and blackness, then remove that within which the corruption is contained entirely; and cure that with what enters that is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and the bone does not exist as it did before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and therefore, you discover again and carefully make the reason of it and its purification by the same means, and strongly fortify it, and restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore, if it is healed, good; and if not, then know that that corruption is in the deep long distance of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore, you cannot enter into that, but only lay aside that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the broken bone is small, or it is possible to pull it back into place, then use delicate forceps that are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If you have the strength to extract all of them, and do not lay any of them down due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If you encounter any resistance due to the moisture, and there is no fear or error in the beginning, then insert the ligaments or flesh that are nearby, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you do not have the preparation of an oster to remove the bones of your hour, then place a poultice on that area that will soften the area where those flesh and ligaments are located, and keep the poultice from becoming consolidated and strengthen the section that you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	However, if you are afraid, then place the incision above the shoulder in olive oil, or below the shoulder in Egyptian anguent, or in any of the verdigris oils, because when those ligaments soften, and the bones are separated from them, the adhesion is loosened, and the bones are attracted to each other.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If there is a large bone like the bones of the back or cushion or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the surface of it, then remove that rust only behind where that blackness and corruption is held, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the area where the corruption reaches, and then cure it before it becomes consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you to ask that person who has experienced that in their thigh for the purpose of placing support and assistance on your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around the age of 30, who experienced pain in his thigh, and from the parts that were putrefied spread over the matter of the body within which the matter reaches the thigh, and it is a great abscess, and not from an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the doctor extends the flame over the affected area without waiting for the abscess to be lanced, and the matter that comes out is mixed with the patient's blood, and the cure of the flame is paused until the bed becomes fistulized, and the points in the wound are all red and filled with humidity from the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then all the doctors took care of him for about two years, but not in that place, but in the arm, until he was called back.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And he saw the bed of that person and the matters that were coming out of those wounds were all mixed together; and the body of that man was completely yellow and the color of the bed was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then he inserted the tent into one of those wounds and reached the tent to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then he examined them quickly and found that they had reached all parts of the bed.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then he showed and inserted into one of those wounds what had been described as entering before corruption, and at the same time he found that it was already corrupted and rotten; and it was already corrupted and rotten; and it had already penetrated into the muscle.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I would apply that which was discovered and prepared from the bone that was exposed.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And then I would apply that which was not in the bone but rather that corruption which I had removed and prepared, and which had already been discharged.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then place your hand over the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then repeat and expose over the bone again, secondarily over the first exposure, and also continue to remove corruption from the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And apply that which appears from that corruption, and then I would perform the cure of it and restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I would expose it again and not cease to gradually incise the bone part by part, and perform the restoration of it, but it is not restored until I have incised almost a palm of it, and that which was extracted from its marrow, and then apply it with medicine, and it is consolidated more firmly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And repetition is not necessary in the operation of amputation or separation of limbs, but for the disposition of the patient's will and for the scarcity of their tolerance and fear of death, as they often die from excessive loss of blood.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And healing is for complete cure, and nothing is in place of hard meat; and it is good to position the patient in their own body and restore its strength; and he is treated according to his conditions and does not cause harm in any way.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bone is in place of the body already broken, then proceed with this method: and it is that you take a bandage and strength at that end of that bone, and command anyone who stretches it; and pause that bandage of thickest wool from the first bandage; and place it over the flesh that is left after the bone, and extend the outer part of it to draw the flesh to the parts left behind, and you uncover the flesh over the place that you want to sew so that the stitch does not wound the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place the table beside the bones properly, as it is not prohibited to use the saw that does not dry out the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And carefully saw the rotten area of the bone little by little, as it is not visible from the outside and requires another method to remove it.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is rotten and not imminently breaking, carefully separate it from one end to the other, as the corruption may be in the middle or in a separate part. Then remove all the flesh from every part; place your hand behind, and saw the first cut until the corruption is continued with the sawing of the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if the sawing is done according to the location of the corruption, do it little by little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, carefully saw the rotten joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then do not saw at the ratio but rather in a way that does not damage the other joint.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the chest of the patient or the foot, it is difficult; however, you should inquire about the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and cut that, and wash it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and let the wound be corrected to you, when not against your own vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	You should know what are the saws and the serrations to cut these bones are according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and parvity of those, and the hardness and rarity; therefore you should prepare all kinds of operation tool suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You should know that this operation means to you on the special tool of which you need; when you are great study and long and knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of the ways of diseases, therefore now you have them for you to use that is suitable for all tools to disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will see that in the end of this chapter, the number of simple instruments that you will process with your prohibition, which you will experience on the others.
Forma de serra:	Saw form:
Forma de autra serra:	Another saw form:
Forma de autra serra:	Another saw form:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Another large saw form:
Forma de ray:	Ray form:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this ray should be in the form of a star-shaped crown, and its points should be in the form of asterisks.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is only appropriate to use those that are worn out when the joints are corrupted, or if the mouth is very wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Another large razor form:
Forma de razori menor:	Smaller razor form:
Forma de razori lat:	Flat razor form:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Another well-made saw form: make the arc of it more rounded and the sharpness of its iron, and the handle of it should be well-made.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor with a hollowed-out shape:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Another form of a razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Another form of a curved razor:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incisor that can cut through bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Another smaller form of an incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor, resembling a ray, with its end shaped like a saw, and is displayed in certain places in the process of bone removal:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a ray that is suitable for the process of drilling through bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and has a sharp tip.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly coated with all the causes that we have said about razors, incisors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the tips of incisors and the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The tips can be sharp either by intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or when you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the cure does not work, sometimes the corruption will lead to the member that is not cut by any cause, therefore cover that member within that hole to prevent the patient from dying or suffering from greater damage to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	When the member of the one who has been affected, is made black within that it may be judged whether the fire has burned the flesh, or if the wound has become infected with pus, approach the blackness close to that member which has already entered that one and which takes all the body; and then cover it with a cloth.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if it is caused by the corruption of some poisonous causes such as a scorpion's sting, or a viper, or a rat, and similar ones.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the poisoning is at the end of that member, then you insert it and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	Similarly, if it enters the body, then you insert that of the reed of the fire, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold of the reed of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you do that, then insert the arm into the cavity at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If the corruption spreads and the smell around the wound increases, then that is the death of the patient; and in treatment, the quantity of that is a matter of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	Similarly, if the corruption spreads and the smell of the foot increases, then you should insert that into one of the nails.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take it from the sole of the foot, then you should insert the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if you can enter through the knee, then you should insert the thigh into the joint of the knee.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already reached the knee, then there is no hope in that case, and you should let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of inserting the member or cutting it is that you strengthen the ligament at the part just before the one you want to insert, and strengthen another ligament over the area; and you extend the minister a ligament to the parts behind, and extend the minister another ligament on top; and you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments a span wide inside so that all the flesh is discovered; and then insert or cut.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover the wound with cloth from all parts to prevent it from touching the area and to allow the patient's injury and abscess to be adjusted and cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	However, if bleeding occurs while working, then cauterize the area constantly, or place some restrictive powders on it; and then return to your medical work before it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bandage the affected member with a suitable bandage and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that which happened to a man in his foot, this accident that you and I have recommended, which occurred because of the black color in his foot due to an injury that was similar to burning by fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption happened first in his toe before it spread throughout the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for such severe pain that the cure would not reach the member due to its intensity of pain and burning, and he did not scream at all, and it healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Over time, it often occurs in that patient with corruption of the mentioned joint.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it affected me, and I felt the need to reflect on that excess of which you have spoken above about the medicines, to cleanse the body of the patient; and if the excess is not reflected, it begins to go to another part where it began in the joint.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he told me to incise the joint of the patient, and I did not want to do so hoping for the reflection of that excess, and more because I feared the beginning of the incision of the joint, which was of great importance to the patient.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he left me, he returned to his land and I was told that that man had prepared and incised the whole joint, and was cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narrative except to be helpful regarding that which is called this illness, and to understand the meaning by which it is understood and according to which it is done.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the care of the intestines and the quality of the clysterization with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in the fleshy parts of the body and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and it is broken and perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the place remains open like a vessel, and the codex that is over it is covered with fine cloth, and it does not reach the depth of corruption, and it does not press on the bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged until corruption reaches a member, then it is called a fistula and does not heal.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment for it is to insert that codex entirely as it is rolled up, and more so when it is thinned out and made with cloth, and comforts that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you hope that the codex adheres and that the corruption has not been completed due to further consequence, and in the codex there is a space, then you treat it with a salve.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And if you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the brace that you use has an odor of fat, then cleanse it with this Egyptian medicament which is made of oil, vinegar, and zinc in equal parts, and place it in a vessel, and cover it with a cloth until the medicament becomes thick like honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse the sinus with that, strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine in it for a period of several hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that which is spicy; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the purity is restored.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes the sinus is cleansed with ash water, when this medicament is not present; and you should take the ashes of willow, and place them on the water; and then add that and cleanse it inside until you confirm that the sinus has been opened.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then clysterize that with a mixture of honey and salt, and clysterize that with a mixture of vinegar and honey, because honey softens and cleanses, and vinegar makes it stick to the intestine, and more so when there is an excess of stipitation and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	Then, when you have done this for some time and feel that the intestine has been relieved, then clysterize that with water that makes the flesh in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And if you take some gentian and dissolve that rosy oil and vinegar that is stipulating; or clysterize that with some medicines and other oils that have the properties that I have written in the treatise of oils.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the intestine are narrowed in which the clyster needle is not received, then gradually enlarge that with a small iron, and pause in it wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the anus is opened, then you add the lips of it with sutures and leave as much quantity in which the intestines are added to each other.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the anus from which the intestine is lifted to the parts above, then dry that in the lowest place which is in it so that the intestine can pass through, because when the intestine is constricted in the precordia of sinus, the flesh is generated in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the environment of the lowest bone as you want, then prepare the member with preparation for which the intestine from which the intestine properly follows what is appropriate for you and that there is no cause of the intestine retained in it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that are placed on the sinus appropriately for that which you want to extend over those on cloth of liver.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a large quantity that it covers all the sinus; and then insert the forceps in the right of the anus of the sinus a slightly wider than the anus of the sinus; and then extend over another cloth of liver from the intestines according to the quantity of the tract, and place it over that for a long position of the anus of the sinus so that the discharge of the intestine is not covered by the large cloth but rather approach it with some days a little wider.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May that which is above the orifice of the sinus, which remains in place throughout the hour to prevent what is adjusted in its place from coming out.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	So that you know whether what comes from the arm is spit or little, or digested, or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And if you have considered the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And if your medication is prolonged in this way, and you see that the matter that has been poured over the orifice of the sinus has adhered, or if it has not adhered, then you may remove it on the third day, and when you remove the plaque, change the dressing and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if from the sinus there comes a thin substance that is not adhering, do not despair of its healing, because the healing of it will take place, as in some people who have a slow generation of flesh in those places, and in others where it is done the opposite.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the sinus is filled with undigested food, you know that it does not adhere; if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, then adjust in the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried like diaphenine, when they are adjusted with excessive addition of zeig.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	The most effective remedy is to take diaphenine and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it on the wound like an ointment, and cover it with a bandage.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And in this action, when there is no undigested food, diaphenine, when it is thickened, use it; or take mallow and aloe and ense, and grind everything and powder over the honey when it is on the fire, and apply a cloth over that over the sinus; and apply a cloth over the honey when it is thickened, and powder over a cloth and strengthen that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Some of the remedies are administered with long aristocracy and lily celestial (and it is lily celestial) and flour of ergots and centaury, and use those simples or adjust them, trim those and crush and powder over the honey that has been recommended; and use that.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinew is prolonged and does not heal with this remedy, then you should know that the corruption is in the bone of it, and already inquires in the bones or in the other hard members or in the ligaments; then you cure it with the fistular remedy as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the remedy for bent fingers and nails broken and incision of the digit added and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an abscess that does not come from the nail of the said toe of the foot or the foot, and it often occurs in the other mentioned ones, and as it prolongs and its cure is highly valued, it is a cautionary abscess, or it is corrupted, and soon breaks into the bone before it erodes the root of the nail, and soon corrodes all of it, and soon perforates its corruption into the bone until it reaches the odor fetent, and the end of the said toe is made black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have that same iron that we mentioned in the division and do not compare your cure, then cover that you insert the entire excess that remains from the nail and approach to cauterize the place where that is useful in an injury.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is healed and the nail is healthy, and the attachments of the nail have already completed the flesh to the parts intended, and they begin to pungent and bleed at that place, then cover that you place a thin cloth underneath the angle of the nail that punctures the flesh, and push it towards that, and insert that flesh with ease, and place over it what remains of the flesh of the medicines that burned corrosively until it is all consumed; and then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already entered into the bone, then cover that you insert that bone and the extractions, because no time can heal what is in the bone corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the corrosion and corruption starting there, then insert that into one of the nuts according to what is remembered, and cure it within that time so that it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	And if the nail is injured by a blow or a sharp object, and there is intense pain in that area, then first, at the beginning, you should lance the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp, transverse cut above it, and be careful not to cut into the flesh that is under the nail, because you will cause the patient severe pain, and also damage the healthy flesh in the area; and then cure that place with something that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	And it is said that this is common in the bones of many men, and very often it is all flesh, and very often it is in the bones, or very often it is in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And many of them are not at the root of the joint, or it is the origin of the pain in many nuts of those.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	When born in a place where chestnuts are not common, it is not considered bad, but when born in joints, it is considered unlucky.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are not born with flesh, the section is considered unlucky, and it is that you insert that devil's root into their main vein.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	When born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, be careful of its abscess.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When born in the flesh of chestnuts, it is recommended that you insert the meat into the round beginning near the bone, and then use one of those convenient serrated instruments to cure it within the time when it becomes healthy.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	When consolidation occurs in the mentioned between their mottled skin or by birth of the person who was born with it, or by consolidation of plague or by combustion of fire, or by similar causes, therefore, be careful to remove that consolidation before the mentioned return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their clothes some olive oil rubbed with rose petals to prevent consolidation from becoming too thick, and separate between those, or place between those a thin layer of plaster until it becomes consolidated according to what you advise.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if there is a consolidation in the wrist called carpal tunnel, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the figure of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	At the beginning of vices, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varicose, and their veins are thick and full of melancholic superfluities that come from the members of the body, and more so in the abdomen, and especially in the abdomens of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, you should administer purgation of the body of black cholera with some enemas that are strong for expulsion, and then draw blood from the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Their cure is done by two methods: one is that it be incised and the black bile is thrown out, and the other method is that the vein is raised and all of it is drawn out.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of the abdomen is done by this method: first, the lower abdomen is anointed with a hot tail before the black bile is thick and slimy from the abdomen, and then the patient's abdomen is raised to the most elevated part of the couch between the abdomen and the end of the bed, and the vein is dried in one, two, or three wide sections, and then the black bile is raised to the uppermost part of the abdomen above and below the patient's abdomen until the quantity and times that you want and that it can bear are reached, and the patient tolerates this.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then approach that one, and command her to refrain from foods that generate black vomit.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is not noticed by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Raise the bed of the patient in this way: you who raise the back of the patient, if it is mottled with blood, and then place it on a cloth and massage the back of the patient with warm water until it becomes red and the veins are exuded; or if exercise is strong, it should be done before bedtime until the limb is scalded.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the cord in the direction of the vein for sectioning at the long or back of the leg, or at the bottom of the leg you should give it a tourniquet, or at the bottom of the foot you should tie it with a thread.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then raise the cord with a needle and excoriate the vein from all parts until it appears to the senses, and it should be palpated by someone who has seen that one decline to black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so, when you have removed and cut that white cord,
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	and then place your hand through that opening that is raised and shaken by the cord, and hold the lion's mouth open with it.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	and then cut another section near that section for three times, and then remove the cord from the part above the vein that appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	and then lift that and insert it behind another section of the leg, and then remove it and lift it through the second section where it is inside, and then remove it from the section that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	and do that through the section from which it is most superior or most outside of all the sections, where everything is inside; and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey you to extract and lift, then insert a strong double-edged needle and tie it to that and remove it, or insert behind the cord and rotate your hand over all the part where it is shaken.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not pierced; for if it is broken, it is difficult to raise that part and it comes over the patient causing harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when that whole area has been scraped off, place your hand over the wound covered with wool soaked in oil and not soaked in oil, and cure it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is twisted and has a curved shape that does not follow the rectitude we have mentioned, then cut it across all its curved parts and at the locations where it is wrapped, and suspend it with a suture within the time you raise it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to pierce the vein and not to wound that area, for it is difficult to raise that part; and use your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision made when the vein is cut:
Forma de unci orp:	The shape of a suture:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be at the exact point where the sutures are or have a sharp tip to avoid wounding the vein; and it should be made of thick, flexible gold, for if it is too thin, it will pierce the vein due to its thinness; having enough thickness as we have mentioned.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the vein of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is born in the hollows in lowlands, such as in the Ategi in Arab lands and in low, dry, infertile lands of little greenery, where there is no herb or shrub.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it often arises in other parts of the body, not just the hollows.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the condition of it is putrefaction that comes from leaving the wound unattended, such as poison from snakes and vermin, and worms breeding between the wound and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the susceptibility of its occurrence is due to this vein that happens in the hollow, violent inflammation; and at the location, it is blistered; and then the vein is removed from the area of that blister, which seems reasonable.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then, when it appears from there, you should wrap around it a piece of lead the size of your foot, entering into two inches, and leave that and let the lead hang from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so many wounds from which blood flows to the parts affected, wrap that in a cloth and place it on that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is extended, then you insert a piece of it and wrap it around; do not insert that which is red inside until it is outside and dry, because if you insert that, it will be contracted and go into the flesh and cause abscess and pustule in the area and ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it can be treated properly and removed piece by piece, until it is completely extracted from the back of it and there remains no cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it is extracted in some people who are in its length of 2 palms and 10 fingers, and I have reached the conclusion that it is one of 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is inserted at the time of its treatment, then introduce the ray into the throat of it and pierce that along the length of the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the area for several days with medicines; and cure that by the treatment of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein has some wounds that cause pain, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it causes great discomfort, and it comes from which orifice.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so treat that as we have said in the division and apply that which is above mentioned.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section of worms generated under the skin and it is called cow disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is not named in any land, but it is called cow disease because of the many wounds that are found on the beasts and it is a worm that is not between the skin and flesh, and it goes through the whole body and falls down, and it is shown at the sensation of its own flesh in each member before the tendon breaks and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is by the putrefaction of some humors that happen to worms and serpents and earthworms and ascarids in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for the evil of it, because when it goes into the body and is raised to the head, and reaches the brain, then great pain comes in it and enters and destroys the brain, and that causes many wounds.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to heal that and extract it, it is not done unless you first examine its appearance and position with the sense, and then firmly hold what is above it and what is below it with a cloth and strongly bind, and then dry it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is present in the flesh and not removed, then you place a hot cautery over the area where it is, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see that it has reached the top of the skull, then strongly bind over the forehead with a strong binding, and then dry it and extract that; and advise the patient to use medicines for the evacuation of bad humors, putrid, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of section for pain in the nose.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is not named in our land nose, and is pain the kind that occurs in various members, and it is passed from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have also seen the second that I will tell you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	He was called to a sick woman in a village, and discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after being there for an hour, he saw that inflammation go away like worms moving in this way, but more slowly than it should be, as if it were live silver when it moves from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain went away from that place and settled in the muscle, and after an hour it stayed there.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it corrected itself in the other body before it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I recommended it to me that it turned around all over her body after I saw it; and it was too marvelous of the change of it and the speed of member in member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen that happening in some people by that way, but I had not seen words that those who atroban dolor are mutated from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I have not seen such things in the hands of women.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I have not thought that this is so, but rather because the woman was of old age, with dry bodies and exposed veins, and in this appearance it seems to me that the warmth has been exchanged.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this appearance does not occur in those who are delicate and have a human body with constricted veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And as you wish to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, do not show your hand in that place where we have said, but strengthen over it and gently press on that area until it is inside that warmth covered, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see those things in the hands, then cure that exclusion of the body and that which expels warmth, and give those bad pills and serapis pills and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From extraction of sage.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sage is diverse according to species, and according to the locations of the body in which they are found, because of their diversity is that some have large points, and small, concave, and deaf, and solid; and some have three angles, and some have tongues; and some have astelas.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the second part of the body that causes pain in the second manner: when pain occurs in any of the main members such as the brain, heart, lung, ribs, intestines, bladder, and similar parts; and when you notice these symptoms, it is recommended to approach the cause as soon as possible, and if you do not see these symptoms, and the cause is not hidden deep in the member, then extract it and cure the pain.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the symptoms of the second part of the body when pain occurs in that area, passing through the bone, and is located above the skull, which is on the brain, because of the strong soda, scotomy, vertigo, pain in the temples, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasm and mixing of understanding and vomiting of anger, and severe leucocytes are abscinded from the word and the voice is destroyed, and it is located above the location of the wet white substance similar to pollen, and it is similar to the swelling of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if you find yourself in such circumstances, then refrain from the cure and extraction of the splinter, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the splinter is in the heart, as it is close to the right breast, and feels like it has caused a serious injury, but not a fatal one; and its movement is similar to that of the limbs, and comes from the black plague, and if that fear and trembling and sweating persists, then you know that death is near.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the splinter has pierced the lungs from below, and the veins that are close to the neck have become inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they breathe with great difficulty, and demand air frequently, then you know that the end is near.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the splinter pierces the skin on the chest, and the pain is close to the small ribs, and is accompanied by great and sudden pain and a loud cry, and does not affect all the limbs of the muscles, then you know that it is not a serious injury.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the sage is placed in the stomach, then one may vomit forcefully due to some undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the sage is placed in the stomach and remains there, then one may vomit some undigested food, or cloth, or intestine that has been ruptured, and there is no hope for recovery from its removal.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the sage is placed in the bladder, and it disrupts urination, and causes some problem with the discharges from it, and there is great pain on the patient, then one should know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	And the other members such as the face, neck, and jaw, and the shoulders, and the back, and the ribs, and the breastbone, and the spine, and the legs, and their similar parts of the body, are saved according to the best dispositions when the sage does not pierce vein or artery and is not venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I would advise you who have seen these sages to know what it means for the cure of this illness.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of this is that in a man, a sharp object enters the lacrimal duct of his eye through the nose, and they extract it from the other side, behind the gray of his eyelid, and it heals, and does not cause harm to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And they extracted another sharp object from a Jew who had it in his eye through the gray of his eyelid, behind the outer eyelid, and the object was already hidden and could not be removed except for a small part that adhered to his cheek, and it was a very sharp object like those of the Turks, with no gold handles.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The Jew healed, and there was no harm to his eye from this incident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And they extracted another sharp object from a Christian who had it in his thigh, and it was an Arabic sword, and it was the one that had its gold handles; and then they carefully removed it from between two wedges, and it was already submerged in his thigh; and then they carefully removed it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And another doctor extracted a stone from a man's belly, and he thought that he would die because of it; and since it had passed thirty days and he was not moved from it for any reason of his dispositions, he incised on the stone and sutured over it, and he was cured, and no harm came to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And he saw another man in whom a stone was stuck on his back, and the wound had closed over it, and after seven years, the stone was found in the center of the cushion.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And he saw a woman in whom a stone was stuck in her belly, and the wound had closed over it, and she was not moved from it in her dispositions, and the woman was not harmed in some of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And he saw another man in whom a stone was stuck in his face, and the wound had closed over it, and he moved the stone, not causing much pain, and similar to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And he extracted the stone from the man of the king's prince who was stuck in his nose and had already declined to the straight part, and the entire stone was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to heal him in the room of the surgeon within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I again examined the wound of the surgeon; and then I inquired from that person with subtle touch, and did not feel anything; but he felt it with a sharp needle behind his ear, and then guessed that that point was at the end of the surgeon.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And then I applied the place with an ointment that has both attractive and digestive properties, confident that this place would help me find the location of the surgeon, so that it could be cured.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And I did not notice any significant accident in that location where the surgeon had achieved it; and I continued to apply the ointment on it for several days without any accident; and the wound was healing gradually, and the patient remained under my care for several days until a day when the surgeon felt pain in his nose and told me about it.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied sharp medicine to the wound for several days until it was ready; and with the touch of the needle, I again examined the end of the surgeon, which adhered to the flesh.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then approach and adjust in the opening of the wound by that sharp medicine until I see the end of the bone, and pass through it for several months within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then approach and widen the wound further, and enter the forceps into it, and remove it, and do not give up, until you finally manage to pull out the forceps with the shape of those at the end of the capital, until you extract it; and then restore that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and you restore it and the wound is consolidated, and heals the patient completely, and there is no harm in it in any case.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And you recommend to you the quality of extracting some bones for which you can apply that rule and meaning on that which I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by narrative nor can they be applied to them freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the craftsmen know how to compare a few things with one thing; and they know what is present in what is absent; and they must acquire new knowledge of operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore it is said that wisdom is not forgotten in the members in which they are fixed, but rather by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which they are inserted; or by the opposite part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is forgotten in the place where it is inserted, or from which wisdom comes, is located in the flesh, and is attracted and forgotten.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the command of the hour in which it is catched, then cover it for several days until the flesh that is around it becomes rotten, and its attraction and exit are delayed.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is fixed in bone and does not obey your command, then leave it for several days and repeat the attraction and movement in each day, and it will be forgotten.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey your master's command to approach those days, then carefully cut around the spine in that bone of all parts until the space is widened by the spine, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the spine is stuck in the bone of the head and has already passed into one of the intestines of the brain, and appears in the patient with those accidents which I have mentioned, then stop the extraction of the spine and leave it inside until its own condition is equal to the days; for if the spine reaches the cerebrum, then death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the spine is not stuck in the bone of the head but only in the body and does not pass into the cerebrum, and the patient remains alive for many days, and no accident occurs from those accidents, then you should engage in the attraction of the spine and the attraction of it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is stuck and you do not obey the command to extract it, then administer drugs around the spine as we have recommended, and cure the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the secretion is already accumulated in the body's location, and it is blocked from sensation, then you should probe that area with a thin needle, and if you feel that, then you should inject that area with appropriate medications for its attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the thickness of the plague and its length, and there are no nerves or veins there, then you should make an incision on the plague in order to enlarge it and make it possible to extract the secretion.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have the appropriate tools to hold it, then you should remove the flesh in which it is embedded from all parts and perform the necessary procedures; and then work on that, if you cannot hold the flesh in the fracture of the ribs and twist of those within the obesity.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the secretion in any location where it is, then you should use your hand with forceps to all parts that make up that obesity; and subtly work on the subtlety that the secretion is not broken and that it is made to your difficult attraction of it and from that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot do it at that time, then wait until the parts that are in the circuit of the patient can be separated, and then repeat that which was done before.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If there is resistance to the flow of sanction, then administer the remedy that we have said for its cure in its capital.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your skill in the incision of veins or nerves or cord, and administer it in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the sanguine; and do that which is easiest, most tranquil, delayed, and firm, as it should be and according to your recommendation.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore make the incision against the sanguine so that the patient is in the figure according to which you should cauterize the wound in it, as it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	If the wounds that are extruded by the contrary of the other part, or if any part has been damaged by the process of the other parts, or if it causes gilbosity in the external maturation of the wound due to the feeling of the part below the proposed code and often in that eminent; then you separate over that; and the section is according to the quantity in which the forceps are taken.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bone, then turn the blade against the second resistance before the saw enters the bone, and spread it, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for several days, and then insert it again until it enters.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the saw is in that place, then push it against it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If it has fallen and you want to administer an impact, then insert it into that place, if it is deaf, use a concave instrument to guide the saw's concavity into the bone and then push it against it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the saw is concave, then push it strongly into that place, where the saw is guided by it.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the saw is poisoned, then cover it with your clothing wherever it is, if possible, and then cure it with that which is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the saw cuts into the chest, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is near where you touch that part with your hand, and it is possible to cut above that, then cut above it and be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, and then extract it, and after that, apply a poultice if necessary, and cure it within the time it takes to heal.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps that are used to hold the skull fragments.
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	With their jaws closed like a beak that are made with a grip when placed on the skull to prevent it from slipping.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	Of those are made special shapes, large, thin and flexible, according to the amount of skull size and its thinness, and the width of the area, and its construction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of concave impeller with this extremity convex like a beak that is used to push the tool into the skull and to push it out.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of blunt impeller of the extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	like a ray that is used to push the tool into the concave skull and to push it out.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of vein tapping.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of vein tapping, which usually bleed from the throat, there are six in the cap, these are two pulsating veins that are located at the temples, called alhasisain; two herbs that are located on the two sides of the temples; and two veins that are located in the two lacrimal ducts of two eyelids that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guidegi that are located on the neck; and two veins that are located in the upper lip; and two veins that are located in the lower lip; and these are the veins called algelic — and there are two veins that are left in the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	May the veins that are punctured in the arms be visible; for one of them is cephalic, and it should be called the wild vine; and the people call it "the head vein", and it is deaf, and it is a migratory vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that vein to the people "the vein of all the body", and the basilica is the vein that is stopped in the domestic rib, and it is called "citillar", and they name that one to the common people "the belly vein"; and the funis of the arm, and it is stopped over the fire, and it is that one in which it is punctured, and it is that one that appears on the foot for apparent manifestation; and the salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smallest called, and it is in the two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of them is that it is stopped behind the curve of the wild vine of the shin; the second is sophena, and its location is behind the leg of the domestic; and the sciatic vein, and its location is behind the wild vine of the shin; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The inflammation of the veins that are close to the ears is an ancient and wandering, sharp, and old ulceration of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of that is secondly what I recommend to you: it is to scrape the head of the patient, and to rub the head of the patient on the occipital bone in the place where the veins are thick with good friction; then strongly bind the patient's head with a band where the two and their locations are close to the ears, and also close to the ears; and ask for that, and if you feel pain in those places, here is what to do.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the cutting lancet, and that which is incisive, and introduce it behind the vein in the groove where the pus comes out to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand over the vein and groove above and incise the vein at the incisive point.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the thickness of two fingers or about that; and make it as deep as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then apply strength to the pulse and leave it inside until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already at the beginning of the book, they give the beginning of those and their cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Of the two veins and arteries that are at the temples, the benefit of phlebotomy is ancient and good and helps to remove excess sharp fluids from the head.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is as follows: press the patient's arm where the two veins appear at the feeling point, and demonstrate their pulse to you; then you will know.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you raise the skin above the vein at the parts indicated to you, and insert the phlebotomy needle behind it, and lift the vein up; and insert it there as you did in the other veins; and let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then loosen the bandage of the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place it on that and the pulse and apply strength to it above the tight one, and leave it inside until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And it is preceded by their recollection, and of those who have already begun, and the attraction at the beginning of the free act.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the purpose of venipuncture of the front vein is to approach the central venipuncture of the head and to treat ancient facial abscesses, emigration, and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of this venipuncture is as I recommended to you; that is, the patient should lean their neck on a pillow with an opening where the vein appears; and then take the instrument called the fossor, which is shaped like this:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then place the puncture at the top of the fossor over that vein and strike it with a pen or another cause in the manner of the patient, and let the blood flow according to the amount you want; and then remove the perforation from the patient and strengthen the area where it was healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some veins are opened laterally, but not that the venipuncture should be of acute extremity as with other venipunctures, in front of the lower extremity, and open that one according to the transverse, where the bone is thin and easily pierced by the venipuncture when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	When the swelling of the two veins that are at the lacrimal of both eyes due to a scald on the eye and inflammation in the eye, and to the diseases of the face,
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	and the quality of the lancet is that the patient should strongly press their neck against a board, and then use the lancet on those, and you should be standing over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	and the incision should be made transversely along the length a little way from the lancet, where there is no flesh; and if the lancet is sharp, then the end of it is broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then run water from the sanctuary as much as is necessary, and place your hand over those wounds, and press them with a cloth, and then remove those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	When the lancet of the nose vein is compared to acute fever and strong salt, and to the diseases of the face and emigration and inflammation that occur on the face, and especially when it is old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the patient's nose is that he strongly bends his neck and brings his own nose to your left hand, and takes a fine needle long and places it in the middle of the second straight part of the nostril, where the vein does not appear here, and where the sinus begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Then gently move your hand with the fine needle according to your need and place it along the sinus, where it is restored better.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The benefit of the fine needle in the treatment of leprosy and other diseases and inflammations and malignant ulcers, as in hydrophobia.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the fine needle in those cases is that the patient strongly bends his neck and brings his own nose to your left hand; and the artist is over the head of the patient, and the patient is lying on a mattress.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then the fine needle punctures the vein longwise with the fine needle gradually; and then extracts blood according to a certain quantity or as needed, and then does the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then remove the ligament and strengthen both veins at the narrowest part to prevent the patient from fainting, and leave it in place until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The juice of the wound of veins, which is similar to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the wound of those is that it causes the patient to faint, and strengthens the neck of the ulcer with a band, and then revolves the lips of the ulcer and looks at both veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of those, and that which is more is that in the circumference of those there are small black veins; and then incise each from the beginning.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	However, if there is doubt about it, and you do not know which of those is, then you should look at the incision of the larger of those, and the most obvious sign of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary to incise the two veins that are on the lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	And from the two veins that are on the tongue, the tongue is approached with the lancet of the cephalic at pre-determined points that are in the gullet, to the patient's uvula, and to other mouth abnormalities.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of puncturing those is that it follows the patient's breath between your hands, holding their tongue, and looking behind the tongue, from one side of the vein and the other, and the color of each is declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then puncture each; and beware that your hand is not in lancet those, because behind those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are punctured in the code are in all men, and the lancet of theirs is done in two ways, or they put a small, sharp knife to subtility declining; or they cut with a scalpel, and remove the skin, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this illness is understood to be of the dry type, according to the specific signs and subtleties of the veins and the strictures of those parts.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of a foot massage:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	if there are signs of it, and it is understood to be appropriate to open the concave veins that are full and proceeding from apparent gross ones, and those that contain large masses of blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of a foot massage with oil:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this foot massage is of lesser extent and more subtle extremity, and it is understood to be appropriate for the massage of thin veins that contain small amounts of blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	After the completion of the massage of the great vein, which is one of three veins: it extracts the blood from the patient's body and neck, and from that which causes the chest and stomach.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is understood to the massager, when performing that massage, to be careful with that one, where there is an artery, and if it is off and adjusted in the puncture of the foot massage, it will cut that artery and cause blood flow, so that he does not perform that massage with a sharp object, before slicing with the illness.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear as expected, then let go of that one and move to the other, or surround some part of it; or use forceps in place of the fingers at the end of the arm, where it is manifest; and remove it with the forceps as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	And if you want to use the forceps in that place, then first loosen the structure of the arm where you are touching the area between the elbow and the shoulder, and place your hand over it; then straighten the arm and remove the vein with the curved section of the forceps as we have said; and be careful not to cause percussion in any part of the area of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, with strength, the ligament, inflate in the place where you have placed your hand, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flowing in the forceps as thin as infant's urine, and the blood is very fine, then know that it is from the blood of the artery; and then take and place your hand over that for a long time; and remove that hand, and if the blood is abscised, because many veins are abscised, then strengthen the arm and let go of that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And guard the patient from the cold, and be careful not to harm them during this time of healing.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	However, if the abscess is not drained, and there are times when you must not present medicine to it, then insert the artery, which appears to you; as the extremity of it is contracted, and the abscess is drained; or take a sharp instrument, and make a hole in that place, and take one thread and strengthen it over the location of the vein, and the tissue and powder inside the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the abscess is drained, it is good; and if not, then cure that from which the powder of the abscessed place flows out.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the drainage of the abscess from that place is difficult due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of the arm tissue.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	However, from the dark vein, the fleubotomy is very useful in extracting the pus from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of a ram from the basilica and a ram from the cephalic, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And approach the veinophobic person who is most afraid of the venipuncture of them, because they have a nerve; and then adjust the needle for the venipuncture and pierce the nerve, it will cause them great pain, and it is difficult to heal them, and often they are not healed completely. And this nerve appears as a twitching sensation; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not shown, then approach the veinophobic person with the needle that you usually use for the venipuncture, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then pierce the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The complication of the venipuncture of the cephalic vein is that it draws the blood to the head and causes the symptoms of the headaches.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And approach this properly, if you want the venipuncture to be done with an olive or a walnut; because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not touch the artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is customary for the lancebearer to only prick the cap of the scapula, and surround the location with leeches, and not apply them directly, unless absolutely necessary, such as in the first percussion of some weeks before the lance bearing.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is often found that an abscess forms in some men, when they are not lance beared in the first percussion, but do not notice it until later.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of the lance bearing and its effects, in which you should think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is the one you know that lance bearing is not administered except for conservation of health and hope of it, and caution against the coming of diseases, and that lance bearing should be done in one of the veins that are in the codex, such as: cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and that lance bearing should be done at the beginning of primaveyra, before breakfast in primaveyra and autumn, and in winter, at dinner, when it becomes significant signs of replenishment.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And perform a lumbar puncture after three hours have passed since the first symptom appeared.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	After lumbar puncture is performed, when it causes convenience and necessity to that, or of night or of day, in every hour and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is not recommended to perform a lumbar puncture until the age of 14, and women should not be performed unless they are pregnant in the fourth month until the seventh, and the elderly who have passed 60 years should not be performed.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wants to be lumbar puncture for any reason, it is recommended that their intestines be empty before the lumbar puncture with a lemon juice, so that the veins do not draw excess fluid in the lumbar puncture of the intestines, which are pure, and do not delay the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And they should not be lumbar punctured the drunk and hungover, nor escape from illness or intoxication until they have recovered from it, nor hydrocephalus, and more that lumbar puncture is feared abdominal pain and vomiting, and abdominal distention, and multiplication of gout and work and exercise of breakfasts or vigils and all cause that dissolves the virtue, whether physical or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And then consider the evacuation of humors that cause this, if the abdomen is large, with food and drink, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then proceed with bathing and if there is no cause that prevents it, or if it is exercised by some exercise so that the abdomen is evacuated.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And place the catheter in its chest, around the time of noon, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And perforate that the chest of that person is kept in that day from all animal misfortunes, as we have said, including anguish, irritation, fear, and all physical accidents, as well as labor and superfluous pain and joy and similar things to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at its side make present the causes in the use of which it usually occurs to men with aromaticity and odor and with baths and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the catheter on a cushion that is put out or that of the one who should be catheterized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then gently pull out his arm, and wipe it with a cloth held by the assistant or two or three nurses; and then strongly tie the bandage around it and wrap those cloths around it.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the constriction is cold, as it is not equal, or the constriction is excessive, then forbid the flow of the sanctum; or if it is a softening, and then forbid the heart from beating.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then loosen the constriction, so that the one who should be the assistant wipes his hands together between their fingers that the veins are inflamed, and declare it to the senses.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the assistant places his finger on the patient's wrist, slightly to the side of the vein, where the phlebotomy is to be done, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is set aside because of the veins that are located like a string fugitive from the phlebotomy, and those that are full of venosity and when the assistant presses on that area, the assistant should press against it, and the assistant should not touch the vein, and if he does, that is strict.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for this reason that the foot-doctor should be stopped and considered in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then, if the vein is punctured in a certain place, then do so; but if not, repeat that action in another place near that spot, or over the patient's bed, if the spot is not infected.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the spot is infected, or the patient becomes feverish, then leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because that would cause more infection or it would not absorb the pus.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the foot-doctoring if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the puncture is small and bleeds slightly, and you fear that it will not bleed enough, then repeat the foot-doctoring in that place again, straight and adjusted to the puncture, and apply that action over the patient's bed, because the spot becomes infected in some people due to lack of blood.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	If you see that it has already swollen, do not touch it, as it may cause some reason for you; and place some part of the oil bandage on it, which would help the body to heal.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is best in this case to use oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, administer oil bandages in all phlebotomy to the one that draws blood from the veins, and do this tyrian alfadoc and sagzenea when placed on the one of those over the area, which would make the swelling subside and turn when it is large.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess forms in the place of phlebotomy, which is caused by vegetable matters, and especially at that one that has not been bled but only with the vegetable matter, or in the puncture of the vein a little, and then you cover it, and place on the area sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen it for an hour, which dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And cover that area with a bandage from that incision or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is any blackness or greenness in that area, do not perform the procedure; and if you wish, place some lotion of myrrh and of mint dissolved, or some lotion of sulfur or of chamomile, or a similar substance.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And move the swollen and elevated parts to be incised with the lancet of the basicilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And place your hand on that area, and if you feel softness, place your compression on that area; then that elevation is bad and bad; and therefore guard yourself that you place something over that area of the substance we have mentioned, which will draw out the blood from the vein.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a styptic substance to that area, so that the area is hardened, and then cure it with the other treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And cover that area with bandages for all people according to the amount of its virtue and according to the color it turns after it leaves the wound, as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	When the bone is black, leave it inside until it is roasted; and similarly, if you see it swollen, leave it inside until it is thinned; and similarly, if it is sharp, leave it inside until its sharpness is dulled.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if there is one who is tall and strong and needs extraction of bone in a difficult way, then the fleam (a tool used for bloodletting) should be amplified and the bledsomer should be left-handed.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in the one who is weak, do the opposite of what was done before, and extract it in easy ways, and let the bleeding be slow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best thing that is administered in fleam bloodletting of vein is that it be transverse section, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of fleam bloodletting is saved from bone fracture and from infection of nerves, and it is more praised and safer than second latitude and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And when syncope occurs during bloodletting, and let you cure that by a small amount of drink in the form of milk or of simple oxide; and extract it from the bone in three or four ways.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is a complication of the complexion, then take the leech to infuse in a tincture of myrrh or in a tincture of honey aromatized with such spices as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or in an aromatic tincture and a certain odorant.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If the leech causes sincopation and this is due to the issue of a certain spice, then take in beurre an egg yolk of carn and an aromatic tincture with a subtle odor; use an aromatic oil, and let it lie on the patient's chest.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of sincopation for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to move their arm and dissolve their second spice, take the leech according to the quantity of its strength, which evacuates the spice little by little, according to the quantity of its strength in consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	When someone wants to perform surgery on their arm, and the second bone is very thin, and their chest is strong, then do that procedure around 7 or 9 hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	When someone wants to shoot the second bone of their chest in the opposite direction of the part where they lean, that should be done on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When that chest in which the second bone has already been shot and is sharp and causes fever, it should be pierced with a needle in a vein, and then a large amount of blood should be drawn from it, and the opening should be enlarged to avoid syncope, so that all the conditions of phlebotomy are preserved; and that you place your hand on the side of the chest, over the heart of the second bone, so that it does not die in a syncopic state, which is due to ignorance and negligence of the phlebotomist.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not do when you want to remove the arm and evacuate the second vein, as it has already been closed at the opening of the vein and is difficult to remove from the bone, which should be done with great force and bent slightly, because that is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	When performing a bloodletting procedure, it is important to use a sharp lancet that is coagulated from the sanctum in the orifice of the vein; or pause on that of tyrian alfarsia, or sagzena, and compress it gently until the sanctum is released.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if you need to evacuate the sanctum again, and there is no excuse, then sign that location or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "funis del bras" is bloodlet in the location of the femoral or popliteal, when they are not enlarged or obscured, which is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the bloodletting from that vein is that the patient introduces their hand into warm water until the phlebotomist's arm becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then place a strong bandage over the affected area of the mouth; and then use a forceps second to the transverse small one, not horizontally or according to the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And then use a wide opening and your forceps to grasp the joint above the mouth.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if it is forbidden to let the bile flow, then you should immerse the patient in water and let the bile flow into the water until you achieve your purpose.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	However, if you are in the days of summer, then you should excuse yourself from immersing the patient in water and instead place the body of the bile in cold water in winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the forceps for this vein is safer than all other veins, since it has not been previously punctured or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the forceps for the back of the patient's hand is similar to the malformations of the foot.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of this forceps is that you should apply pressure to the patient's hand or your own hand, rather than immersing it in water, until the vein is inflamed and is clearly visible; then use a transverse forceps; and if you insert it, then you will not see anything in return.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And do not leave your hand on the patient's mouth, as it would press their exposed nerves.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then repeat the hand movement in the lower abdomen and let the blood flow out of it, as if you do not repeat this in the lower abdomen, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted according to the necessary amount, then you place your hand on the vein or salt, so that it does not become solidified constantly; and similarly, make sure you do it in every straight direction.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The risk of the patient's mouth being pressed by your hand is similar to that of a snake bite.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	Do the same in the patient's mouth as you did in the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The risk of the vein being punctured in the patient's mouth is similar to those that are in the part behind the neck, as well as its risks of the uterus and menstrual retention, and the risks of ulcers and old joints and hips, and their similarities to other risks.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the fleam used on the patient is that the patient should insert their own foot into the water and make the incision through which the veins can be seen; and tie over the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the location of the vein should be apparent from the red spot, and from there it branches out in the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then use the fleam to make the widest incision possible, under the cushion and away from the patient's chest, where the vein should be most apparent and least harmful.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you make the incision on the surface of the foot, then be careful not to cut the nerves that are located on the surface of the foot, and pause your fleam at the place where you would like to insert it, as if you wanted to inscribe it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And make sure the fleam is sharp.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the discharge of pus is prohibited, then you should wash the foot in the water and let the pus run out through the incision where it can be drained.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the flue-bottle manufacturer errs in the first vein, then repeat the flue-bottle procedure on him with a small one, as the location is sal; and do not fear his malice, but guard against the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, make the shoe of the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, place the calf bone behind the shinbone of the wild beast's leg.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the joint of the flue-bottle procedure of it is at the hip when it is through the careful cauterization.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the flue-bottle procedure of it is that the patient enters into a bath, and he quickly and strongly rubs the cushion of his leg from the side of the wide entrance above the calf below four such a long subtle band, which does not appear otherwise.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And then when it appears, then repeat the flue-bottle procedure on that second one each one according to what is possible and according to the transverse, and it is better; or inscribe that by beginning or cut off that by sectioning, as the location of it is sal.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is often seen in men who are not well; and if you find that, and it does not appear to be the cause of all, then blow some air into one part of it, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot, which is called the auricular and annular.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and pour out as much of the sanctified substance as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then remove the restriction and place your hand over the location of the blowing, strengthen the location, which is usually healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From wind and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Winds are from corn, or from earth, or from air.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And wind is made in two ways: one of them is by scarification and extraction of sanctified substance, and the other is by scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this wind that is by scarification is done in two ways: one of them is by fire or by using fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the winds that are administered by scarification and extraction of sanctified substance are four locations on the body, of which the first location where winds are placed is the navel, and it is the last part of the head; and the second location of it is two parts of the neck; and winds below the jaw after the mouth; and winds of two spoons; and winds of an alohoster, and it is on the tip of the coccyx; and winds of two forceps, and they are from two bones; and winds of two cavilhas; and winds of two cuoyssas.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And do not extract the pus from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason, no virtue is obtained for those, as it would be if it were done by phlebotomy; nor does it cause any harm that ventozacio should be made with fire or with hot water in some bad condition made for filling before the whole body is completely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	However, if the necessity for ventozacio is caused by illness or continuity, administer it at all hours of the day and at the end of the month, and in the middle of the day and at some time during that period.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The reason for this is that in some men, the pus multiplies inside them before the necessity of extracting it by ventozacio, and atrophies in their own head, causing great pain and swelling; and of those who atrophy in their face and on their head, and in their neck; and of those who atrophy in their face and on their forehead, and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and of those whose location of ventozacio is affected; and of those whose taste is multiplied in their mouth, or whose tongue is swollen with pus; and of those who sleep is multiplied, and of those who have pain in their sleep, recurring and persistent and other causes similar to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it occurs in any of those causes, and particularly if it is in the thigh or calf of the leg, then command that a bandage be applied, especially if it has not passed for two or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And it is customary to apply a bandage to the neck because when that reaches gravity in the head and causes a swelling of the veins, but rather than that, it should be an evacuation of all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this bandage is in the location of the neck incision of the cephalic.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not appropriate to use that which is of fragile complexity, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that reason, do not use those which are old, and in the heads of which there are illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But rather than that, it is customary to make the bandage continuous over the wound; and for that reason, do not command the bandager to place his hand at all on the bandage, lest there be a generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	May swelling of the alcohol be in the place of fleam for the femoral vein and the basilic: and for that reason, it is compared to asthma, and to the constriction of the lung and the cut of the instrument of the lung, and to coughing, and to inflation.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And cover that the swelling of the alcohol is small, because if it is placed under, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the swelling of the alcohol compares to accidental headache, and obtunding, and prefocus, and to pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of fleam for the basilic.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And cover that commands the swelling-maker not to press his hand during incision so that it does not pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the swelling under the jaw compares to alcohol in the mouth, and to corruption of the gum, and to similar things to those that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of fleam for the vein that is in the upper lip.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	When the ventilation that is made on the two spoons is placed under the cap, which is made for the retention of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of the two spoons is taken from the needles that are used in the fleubotomy of three veins, namely the basilica, fusca, and cephalica, which attracts all those small veins that are in the flesh, and those smaller veins from the larger veins where the attraction to the three veins occurs.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the ventilator that he does not proceed in incision, because the area is exposed to flesh, and then leaves his nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And there is a ventilator that is blown over the buttocks and placed on the hemorrhoids of the anus and on the ulcers that are left.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it is recommended that you command the ventilator to be a large one, and of iron, because the area requires strong drying; and it is necessary for the thin ventilation to be used and to be incised during the incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	When the patient's bed is covered with cushions that are too soft, it tends to make the spine curve, which resembles the old pains of the ribs and the spine; and it provokes menstrual pain, and it resembles a backache and sciatica; and it takes the place of flebotomy for those who have phlebitis, and it causes hemorrhoids, and it takes the place of cautery for those who have sciatica.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, a soft bed makes the whole body weak and causes hypocapnia in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the cushions, the hard ones are preferred to the soft ones for the backs of many beds.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the cushions is that they are placed at the beginning of the bed and are gradually increased in number, and do not prolong the position of the cushions, but rather change them frequently, and keep them evenly, so that the humors can come to the place for the occurrence equally.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already red and swollen, and that the pain of the spine appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then, you should shave and repeatedly clean the area in small parts, and then consider the position of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that man who has thin flesh and many moles, you should shave a wide area and not just the mole, so that the area is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the ventilator to enlarge the shaving area and apply a small amount, and at the same time clean the area.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the area is swollen, then shave two strips, because in the first strip the incision for the tendon and its fluid are found.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second strip, the examination of the acquired fluid from the extraction of the swollen area.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the tendon is dirty, then make a thorough shaving of the clean strip to obtain the end.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And ultimately, when we want to extract the tendon in small parts or a small amount, we need a shaving.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a large tendon, make a large shaving; and if we know that the tendon is large, then shave in preparation.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term for incision in which the depth of the wound is only as deep as the spine.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the person whose wound is thick, hard, black, and their pores are straight, then it is recommended that the locations of the bowels be made more gentle, open, and resolved; if it is in summer time, use olive oil of aloe, or olive oil of violet, or olive oil of damask roses, or olive oil of chamomile; and if it is in winter time, use olive oil of narcissus, or olive oil of lily, or olive oil of camamilla, or of sanc, and similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and freezing, then use oil of amarnthus, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloe, or oil of anethi, and similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the intestine is of wide pores of tender flesh, then it is recommended to prohibit oil, and recommend that for these locations of the bowels be washed with warm water of salt, or with cold water of violet, or with water of damask roses, or similar.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the patient's skin is of moist nature, wash his armpits with warm water or with water mixed with myrtle and bay leaves and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the patient's skin is of thick nature, wash his armpits with warm water or with water mixed with sage, lavender, or chamomile, and similar to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is recommended that the armpit be cleaned immediately after washing; having washed it, it is recommended to apply it immediately after washing for an hour or two, and it is recommended to sleep near the armpit.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done before performing a bloodletting on a patient who needs to have his armpits cleaned?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	If the person who is to be bled or the one who is to perform the bloodletting is angry and has inflamed skin, it is recommended to take cooling causes, such as vinegar with roses, warm water with salt and lemon, and secanabin, julep, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	Pause a their wounds with a clean cloth, and meat of chickens seasoned with herbs, and cooked vegetables, and similar foods.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	From that which has been fried, take away the skin and gristle, or the skin of dried apricots, and sumac, and some fragrant spice between old and new; and it is recommended that they use little bread and eat, and place their food on a clean cloth and canebir, and pickers, and small birds, and dove.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is recommended that on the day of wind and flu, the bread should be larger than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is recommended that bread be given to some men of Tyrian alpharac, or medicaments of musk, which is musked, or alcelita for wind or flu or similar, so that the main members are comforted and that the sick person is weakened; and do not let them take that scalfatz.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	When the incisions made are placed over the skin, muscle, and abdomen, and over the umbilicus, in the areas of the joints, and the groin, where these members do not usually undergo incision.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those but for the purpose of drawing out blood from a limb, such as a puncture over the breast in case of bleeding from the wound of the nose; and we use that which dissolves the viscous blood from the surface of the member, such as a pad on the abdomen and umbilicus; because that rarefies the member and relieves the pain that resolves the viscosity.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is placed over the ribs when they are injured or pierced, because by the power of the draw it quickly removes the injury and eradicates the piercing from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, when it is placed over the skin and muscle in those who are confined.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these incisions are administered with suction only; and some wounds are administered with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Some baths are administered full of warm water in the illnesses of the mule.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is to fill the windpipe and make it larger, so is the warm water alone or water in which certain herbs have been boiled that are suitable for it.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The form of the windpipe administered with fire: its width is two fingers, according to what we have formed; and the amount of the remedy is the length of one palm; and it is on the side of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the most of it, the tube should be small according to the amount that enters into it a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of lead or citron, of large margins, lion, equal and sharp so that it does not damage the member because of its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it should be at the end of it a crossbar of lead or iron, where the candle is placed to the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this windpipe should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and the less of it according to the illnesses and the state of the one who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the breasts of infants are softer than those of young men and large-breasted women.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of applying this hot cloth to the member is that it extends the muscle with hot charcoal from a small candle of wax, and place it on the edge of the longitudinal incision in the middle of the wound, so that the fire is lit around the part that was not burned, so as not to burn the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then place the cloth on the patient's member, and say the spell over it, until they have applied the hot cloths and do not need to open the mouth anymore, so that the steam can pass through that opening, at which point the cloth will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then apply the second muscle according to its method, and repeat that if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In the hot cloth that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, which has no longitudinal incision or opening, and is not administered unless it is filled with water, and is placed on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is the shape of it: And this windmill, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Blood-letting is not administered in most members, but only in those members in which it is impossible to position windmills, such as the mouth, gums, and similar parts; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the nose and similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found blood-letting devices that are in the waters of polluted rivers.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then lay them down in the water of the polluted river, before they become famished, and that no cause is in their stomachs; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with bleeding and with windmills; and then wash the patient's member before it becomes red; and then place them on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and cased.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	If it is possible to see the wound directly, it is better to do so.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, then wash the wound with clear water and apply a compress; and dress and express it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the wound is prolonged, place it in the cavity of the arm, and let that water run out, then you insert a cloth in cold water into that opening where the blood has been collected.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the wound is multiplied, then powder it with orpiment or vinegar and similar substances to stanching agents until the wound has stopped bleeding; or place the most roasted beans on the wound, and leave them there until the beans stick to the wound, and then the wound stops bleeding.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, change the dressings of the wounds when possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the wounds are not allowed to be suspended, then wash the wound with recent blood or insert a needle into the wound where it is possible to see some blood; and then place the dressings there, so that those dressings will absorb any blood as soon as it appears.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to cough, sprinkle some powdered aloe, salt, or ash on those parts, and they will soon cough.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	And here begins the text of the fourth section: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental displacement in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh son, be wise and know that many foolish doctors and laypeople, and those who sometimes do not follow the books of the Ancients or read one letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason this method of the sciences in our land is hidden; and I have not done it before, but I am obligated to do so now; and I have not admitted anything else, but rather by the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science of those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then direct yourself to experiment and study in the length of your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described all of this in this chapter, which contains the main science and on which the best experiment has been passed; so that it can be made clear to you and relieved from the occupation of elongation; and it is made clear at the end of clarification; and it is shown in the end of declaration; and it is formed into several forms of instruments that are administered in that, as it is done by addition of declaration, such as has been done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter One.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from the fact of bone fractures, from those that must be mentioned before we begin to remember the injuries and varieties of each limb.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Let us therefore say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to which the artist is referred, according to the truth of those; so that you and those who promptly know or learn this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so it is said that when such things as fractures or dislocations or twists or injuries occur to a person, it is customary to apply a splint or bandage, or whatever is appropriate, unless there is some cause that prevents it, such as debility of strength, or the person is very old or infirm, or it is a time of great heat, or of great cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with eating fresh herbs and small pieces of poultry and crabs; and avoid large pieces of meat and filling up on foods that fill the veins with blood, unless you are sure of not developing an abscess, or if you fear the spread of matter to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their usual diet and routine first.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is customary to feed the patient on nutritious foods that are moist and heavy and have viscosity, such as bread made from wheat and water, and rice, and caps, and peas, and bellies of cows, and hens, and fresh fish, and large and similar foods, and this diet is made by coagulation of fracture more gently and longer.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	When bones are fractured in men who have them in their first vulnerability and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to remain continuous and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	They remain continuous and consolidated according to their nature for all time due to the drying of those members, and they continue and consolidate those that are in the end of their life, just like the bones of newborns.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and amends the broken bone from any part of its body, similar to how glue adheres and strengthens that which is ensemps conglutinatz and liatz, until venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, just like fire at the beginning, until some cause does not prevent it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to place the cushions of the patient, cushions in which there is gravity and viscosity and weight, just as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	There is great variety of fracture according to the difference of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the types of fractures are different according to the diversity of the members, because a fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the skull; and the fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the shoulder; and similarly all other members are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have remembered the memory of all types of fracture, explained in its own distinct chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Great variety of fractures in itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of bone fracture are varied in their own ways; because some fractures are made arcuate, others happen at the stars; and some fractures are made according to the length of the bone: and some fractures of the skull, ribs, and additions proceed and do not proceed, as it is made in the pen when it is prepared to write, and the fracture is a large and disruptive one in the head, and the fracture is a small fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each type, there is a proper torture in the restoration of it according to what will come from its own distinct memory in its own places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Large fragment of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for that, it is known as a bone fracture: the swelling of the affected area, and the presence of a prominence or lump at the touch, and its location when you feel it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore, if there is no swelling or lump apparent in the location and it is not felt with gentle touch when you touch the bone and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there may be swelling or a small fissure, in which case you should gently press on the affected area and apply compression to all; place something over it of the medicines of which you have memory appropriate for that moment; and keep it straight with subtle pressure.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you should know that the location when it is curved and not split into two or another, as it remains entirely on the surface of the body, then place something over it from your hour to correcting it with caution post-asterma.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess occurs, leave it open for several days until it stops, and then dress it with the best method of elevation and compression that you can.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the repair of the bone and its healing is slower than the healing of the flesh in which the fracture occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it when the memory of it returns.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the bone is fractured, it is necessary to extend this member by two parts, whether it is the arm or the leg; or if the limb is small, use your hand; or use two ropes or one rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place your hand in the position where you place the limb according to its natural shape, while the parts of the fractured member are extended, then press that you make them return to their places according to each method that you can in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard yourself according to your strength so that you do not harm the patient during your operation or their injury; and press according to your ability that you apply the bone to another as companions according to the best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And if in that hour you touch your hand on that place, and if you see any other cause here, rectify that and equalize it with the amount of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And if you excessively extend or compress, as foolish doctors do who move quickly and cause abscesses to occur due to their operation, or cause contractions in the member as we have seen due to their quick movements.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And if you annex, equilibrium and proper operation and structure of that member, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make him understand that it should not be moved in the hour of his watch and sleep, and see its revolution and agitation, and direct all its movements with all your skill; and wait until the position of the member is a position in which pain is guaranteed, which causes that when it is in the position of the member the injury; then advise to replace that with another position of that in which he does not feel pain; and guard that this position of his is straight and equal, so that the member will not suffer tortuosity when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the fracture of the limb is as I have recommended; since you know that broken limbs vary in their location, size, and shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, like the arm and the finger and similar to these, it is recommended that the wrapping be made of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are large, like the cushion or the chest, it is recommended that the wrapping be made of thick and durable cloth, because the looseness of the thick cloth connects the limb strongly and equally to the fracture from all sides, without any gap.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then, as soon as possible, begin your equalization of the location, place a suitable bandage over that fracture, with three or four layers, depending on how much the limb has swollen; and strengthen your hand a little by holding the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then go to the most accessible part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen it so that your grip does not break the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then gently extend your tongue into the area of the fracture, gradually softening the structure little by little, until you feel a large part of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other affected area over the fracture, and gradually move the bandages towards the part behind the fracture; and your operation should be in the structure of the bandage and in the softening of the second one that we have mentioned in the first bandage.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place a cloth or sheet between the bandages that is equal to the twist of the fracture, if there is twisting in it; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place a cloth or bandage on the other bandage, and gradually cover these sharp-edged bandages as soon as possible, if there is inflammation or pus in the area; and then place the cloth over that which secretes the pus and supports the inflammation; and leave it there for several days; and then strengthen the bandages on that area.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And if the splints of the canna leaf, well formed and skillfully made; or of wood; or of ramps of palm; and let the width of each splint be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, make sure that the splint placed over that fracture is thicker and longer than the others, and the length of the splint should be according to its size and position on the member; and strengthen the other end with another band according to your first stricture; and place the band above it decently as we have said about the stricture, and let your stricture be according to the location of the fracture, and the longer it is from the fracture, the looser the stricture.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And make sure that the threads are made of strong and fine silk; and they should be of gold; and if the threads are thick, then as I have seen in the operation of sewing up wounds with thick cords of silk, twisting the threads together, and this is a great error when catgut is used to make the stricture equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And fine needles are not suitable for this purpose, as you will not be able to accurately place those that you want, and there should not be any gap between one and the other of the same length.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is lying on the ends of the stakes near the structure in those places, then place a cloth or woollen blanket over them to prevent any harm from that.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are caused by injuries, and accidents can disrupt the chain, and you will find memory in that one in the second chapter's singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that not all broken bones are straight on the first day; this is because the bone, when large, does not allow for resting on the stakes for less than five days or seven or more, depending on your confidence in the risk of an abscess occurring.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of the ancients for which they restored these plasters, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Hand cream for the treatment of fracture splints, suitable for various complications and especially for women and children, which is not suitable for cold or wet: and you should take powder from ground flour, and the middle of the flour that you have to apply to the movement of the bone in the parts of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if there is such a thing, do not use that album of honey, but apply the comfortable condition to the non-essential or subtle part; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way to treat fractures and dislocations and sprains: recipe of asafetida, of lapdanum, of acacia, of enula, and of migrach, which is made from milkweed salt, of all the ana drac. x; of mirra and aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; all their trissatz and crumbled and mixed with water or honey if the condition of the patient is scalded; and then use this splint, which is made of good composition and restores the broken bones more easily, and confers to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another remedy for fractures and sprains: Take equal parts of mallow, mint, aloe, and Armenian bole, and mix them together.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Grind all the ingredients in a large mortar with contraction, and their crumbs, and their powders in water or egg white, and administer it.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Remedy for joints and bones separated from their places, and painful accidents in those areas, and fissures and fractures: Take a piece of linen cloth and soak it in warm water and oil, and place it on the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This remedy does not have the virtue of healing, but rather prevents and expels pain from abscesses.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another remedy that heals fractures: Take willow bark and wild poppy leaves, grind them all together, and make a poultice from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Remedy for applying to the healing of fractured bones and when you want to resolve a recent abscess: Take equal parts of mallow root, camomile, violet flowers, flour of ers, and all mixed together, grind them all and their powders in water, if the limb is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalded, then apply a wet, humid cloth or use a wet cloth from it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plaster is more effective for the recovery of the member: take herbs such as althea and seeds of lily, balm, melissa, majorana, flowers of viol, camomile, all cut in parts and equal; all this is thrashed and mixed with soft water or soft water or warm water, according to the quality of the member and its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	If you do not have Ypocras in your freezer, then apply a wax and oil cream on the affected member to recover it, not any other cause; and recommend that it be applied between roughness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	If it is seen that it should be applied on the affected member to recover it and its causes in which drying is small in heat as with milk, like oil and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Hand plaster that relieves injury and pain: recipe equal parts of mugwort, sage, hair from an unshorn man or animal skin, aloe, salt; three parts of honey, beeswax, and oil, and make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount should be determined based on the size of the wound and applied appropriately, considering whether pain, swelling, or bone fracture does not occur, and if it is not suitable for its location, do not apply for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if pain, swelling, or inflammation occurs at the location, then apply or remove it in that hour, and leave the plaster on it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a cloth and sea sponge, soak it in warm seawater, and let it cool in cold water; then wash the wound until the swelling subsides and the pain is relieved; then rest the member for an hour; then place a cloth soaked in hot wine and olive oil or rose oil on it, and leave it there for a night until you are sure of the abscess, and that the inflammation of the member has subsided, and that the pain of it has remained.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then gently repeat that delicate structure and apply a small and not too strong plaster for your primary constraint, and gently enter that which is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents have already been healed from everything, and if you need to apply plaster and constraint, then repeat what you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no harm occurs to the member of those that we have said, then do not remove it for three days or four or five or six; and sometimes all of this is left for twenty days after you appear by the removal of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it settles on the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust in the constraint more than in your primary constraint, and adjust in the swelling of the food of the patient, after it is preceded by the remembrance of him.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see that the location of the fracture has already dried up and become more extenuated than it should, then know that that nourishment is prohibited from reaching that; and so soothe that with a wet cloth throughout all the time that you removed that; and this is all in three days; and gradually increase the constraint, and for this operation bring the nourishment to the member, and it is healed more easily.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	When those who claim to be folk healers of the broken limb of a member in another way when it is not restored to its original position, according to their own method, and if it is restored according to its tortuosity, that is an error according to their operation, and great fear results, and if that were done correctly, it would increase the ancient ones in their freedom and they would be able to do that work.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	I have never seen anyone of them do that, so it is reasonable that they should not do that.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter two: Of fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are different, and their shapes are diverse, and their causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of space, which affects the entire bone, which is located behind the bone, as if it were in the bone, and for that reason this type is called ascial; or the space enters a part of the bone, and enters the flesh of it and does not pass through the inside of it to the back of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the pain from these two fractures is great or little, and the fracture is contracted or atrophied; and the cause of it is percussion with a pointed object or a blow on stone, and similarly.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is so deep that it approaches the periosteum which is under the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the pain from these two fractures is great or little.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And the fracture is such that it occurs within the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and for this reason, this special fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And the fracture is such that it occurs by a blow or percussion of stone, and similarly, which causes some bone fragment to enter into the cracks, and it is made in the concave location as happens to the ribs when they are hit and broken, and the fragments enter into the cracks.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is more commonly done in the bones of humans, as in their skulls.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these special fractures are stable, as if they were separate stones.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I would like to return everything to its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I would like to detect all these special fractures over those and for investigation of their causes and the corruption of flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And a special type of fracture is known by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and it is removed, and it is rubbed on the injury, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, one should consider the symptoms of the patient at the beginning, and if you see through the symptoms that indicate clearly by manifest signs such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of understanding, abscess of the mouth, fainting, acute fever, and swelling of the limbs and pain in those, and similar to their symptoms in the major dispositions, these are not cured.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see symptoms that do not correspond to a cure, then you should begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	When the cause is that it comes to your leg in the beginning as it is swollen and that is in the days of winter, then you should study in the bone of the horn during the day number fourteen in all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then you should study the bone during the day number seven, having that which is left of the bone be corrupted by the pancreas, and that accidents occur to the accidents that have been mentioned.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the pancreas covering the brain, and it is small and dark, then you should incise the cut and dark part, according to what I will tell you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you raise the head of the patient swollen, and uncover the bone according to custom and your ability according to the figure of the swelling, and that it be lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if an accident occurs to you in the detection of the bone, flow of pus or abscess cautiously, then you should pause at that place and apply what I will tell you, and that you fill the place with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and make a pressure on the swelling until it is sedated, and be sure of flow of pus; and afterwards begin in the circumference of the bone and in its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first method is that you insert the bone with a straight incisor, and this is the form of it: And then administer another incisor, slightly wider than the other; and this is the form of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer the wider incisor.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should have different incisors of various widths, some wider than others; and some shorter than the others and they should be in the back of their sharpness of their extremities, and they should be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion on the incisor so that you do not damage the head and it does not break that one.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then drill around it, giving that you administer the incisors with the shallow taravels, which are called non-deepening taravels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And these are not called anything except that those do not pause the end of the bone at which you approach it, so that the taravel is rounded extremity or margin on that which is left the sharp edge similar to the margin or a small circle, which prevents being submerged and passing the density of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take from these needles a large number of those that are suitable for the size of each bone, until it is present in all tests of the brain, with its sharp end, the quantity in length and brevity is according to the quantity of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of needles: The quality of piercing through the circumference of the broken bone is that you place the needle on the bone and rotate it according to what you know that the bone has already penetrated; and then move the needle to another location, and place that which is between all the thickness of the ray or around it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert the needle that is between each layer of the bone, and make it as thin as possible above that in order to elevate, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for the damage that has appeared at that, as thin needles and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be careful that the needle does not touch any cause of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have circled the bone perforations, and if it is continued with the same instrument, and that extracted, cover it with a razor that is rough and unequal to that in the sharpness of the other similar instrument, but rather more sharp and subtle than the others.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there is any fragment of the small bones and sharp ones, then take that which you have from the instruments; and apply it to cure the wound with linen and find those that we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other way of operation is long and difficult, which Guilielmus and the author say is great; and this is the word about it: it is necessary for you to begin by discovering the part of the bone in which the fracture is most violent and most manifest, before you have discovered that part and placed behind it the end of this slow and light saw, of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And if the lens-shaped fragment does not penetrate any cause, and the sharp fragment is in two places ahead in length, as sometimes; then the lens-shaped fragment should be adjusted to the bone at the face of the sharp fragment incising into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then approach the incision with a small, sharp knife, and insert it entirely into the bone to facilitate the turning of the bone as needed, and be sure that the pericardium does not occur in the accident that you fear in any manner, and if the physician was the most powerful of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly,
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then if there is any cause of attachment to the pericardium at certain places of the bone, insert that into the end of the incisor that lens-shaped, and remove that from it with ease, which is removed from its harm and its fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the pericardium, and that which is cut or stopped on the bone is the surface of it, and in its roughness and subtle scratches, then cover that roughness and remove those scratches with a razor sharp for those you have prepared the number, of different quantities so that it is possible to administer them in all places the most convenient of them and the most correct of those second that in which you lost your operation that bone broken and the figure of it.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And if you administer the remedy in your reason, which you have used to cure the bones at the beginning of those razors, and then use it close to the most subtle part of it, do not cease to do so until you reach administering the most thinnest of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In each of the other small fractures and thin fracture, if you administer the remedy according to that which you have lost for its correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is not caused by all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And it is based on what we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the skin is pulled when you remove the bones, then you should take cloth of the second amount of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place that over the orifices of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled, and submerge it in warm oil and rose oil, and place that over the first cloth, and do so as gently as possible without pressing the wound; and then administer a broad bandage, not stretching it more than the amount of the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that patient to this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess's healing; and then remove it and administer medicines that are too moist, such as linseed and flour of eggs, and powder of myrrh and aristolochia, and similar ones to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make those medicines into powder that is ground over the surface, if they are dry; and generally, administer all the medicine of its property that is to remove and not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard yourself that the wound in your cure is not contaminated; and it is not in the silence of gum or another; nor do you let it add virulence to it; because when it is adjusted on the brain's membrane, it corrupts that and poisons that, and accides on the patient with that malicious evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And accides in the cavity of the head, as it is modified there the bone and more when it is spread on that cure, and it is blackened on its surface; and therefore consider now if it accides on the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is paralytic for all of them.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If there is no black magic involved in the medicine that is placed above, and it is due to the effect of that medicine that causes the black magic, then you should take a piece of honey and four parts of roasted oil, and place those lines on a cloth, and place that over the cipher; and cure that with the specifics of cure that are appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You should know that the nose is not broken into two parts equally close together, or one of those some wavy, because in it there are two bones, and the part that remains is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and does not affect it except for its curvature and tortuosity and sinusitis.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts is broken, then you should introduce the same small bone into its own nose, and equal that fracture with the other intact bone, and with the other deformed bone, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for your own convenience, and remember not to cause harm to the patient during your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not permit vision in that area, then cover it with a small piece of cotton.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the same thing.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And cover it with a bandage for the restoration of the fracture on the first day after the injury, if possible; otherwise, later apply the seventh or tenth degree of the cauterizing agent.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or place two small pieces, if the fracture is in two parts, and let them fill the nostril completely.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And say to the ancient healers that the pieces should be wrapped in bread, and moved around every day, but not seen by me; having covered the cloth with a piece of honey-sweetened powdered molasses; and later remove it when the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some wool should be placed in the nose, instead of water, to prevent it from being suffocated by a cloth that covers the lion's fur; and if the fracture of the nose is very painful, the patient should not be prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; if you want to do it, do it, and if you want to, make wounds.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another wool causes an abscess, apply the nose with a cerate or a poultice of bread and rose oil, or diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If an abscess does not occur, then cover the wound with flour of starch and powdered oak bark mixed with egg white; and place your hand over the lion's fur, and do not let the nose be exposed to any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are broken or crushed due to a small fracture or comminution, then cover them with those, and remove those with instruments that are suitable for those; and place this laceration, and cure it with what envelops and consolidates, and with what ointment is appropriate.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If there is a pain in the nose, then apply warm compresses and administer steam through a nozzle until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	About the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture does not cause pain, if the fracture is only slightly deformed and not completely broken into two and curved to the parts inside, then it is considered healed.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is in the middle, then introduce your finger into the patient's mouth on the left side of the jaw; similarly, if the fracture is on the right side, then introduce the same finger into the right side of the patient's mouth; and push it against the deformation of the fracture to facilitate the parts deformed, with your other hand on the other side of the deformed part of the bone; and adjust it accordingly.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two, then apply traction to the two parts in a straight line until it is possible to realign them.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if the teeth are dislodged and disrupted, then use those that you hope will remain in place, such as gold or silver or cedar; and place them on the broken jaw, and place them on the doubled cloth, and place a large sheet of cloth decently made, or a weight equal to the length of the jaw; and hold it above second that you have equipped the jaw with and that is appropriate for application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and find peace, and place the soup of lions in their mouth.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then take and remove it on the third day; and correct what is already altered from it and apply that with powder of moli, album of hoo, or powder of cinnamon, before you have removed the plaster from it, and place a lion's wool over the application.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then with this annex and adjust that plaster on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave that, until it is healed and strong the fracture; for this fracture is stretched in three days.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another complication occurs, such as an abscess that needs to be lanced, then administer the same medication that we have mentioned for other complications during the patient's recovery, and that abscess will remain there.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is severe, consider whether the broken bone is dislocated or not. If it is, then carefully apply that medication that is suitable for removing those from the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the orifices of the wound are narrow, then carefully enlarge them with a bodkin according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And if you have managed to remove those fragments and the wound does not close again, then carefully enlarge the orifices of the wound; otherwise, place one of the appropriate ointments on it and cover it until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the wishbone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Certain complications cause the wishbone to break at the point where it connects with the shoulder muscle, and that fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts other than those that are natural; and it is better for its restoration; or it is such that there are accidents in its natural parts, and it is difficult for its restoration; or it is such that the fracture is extensive.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is extensive, is that you make two assistants present, so that one holds the helper and follows the broken clavicle, and the other extends the neck to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then align the fracture with the rods called introquets, in the form of a second rib, and not in its eminence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if more extension is needed, then cover it with a cloth or wool, and its size according to the quantity of your need; extend and elevate the clavicle and tie the cloth under your hand until the fracture is aligned as desired.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot pull the tip of the wishbone to the parts forward, so that it reaches the prone, then have the patient lie on their back, and place a large cushion under their neck.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The assistant then stretches the muscle of the patient under the parts forward until the bone of the wishbone is raised to its position in the prone, and then you correct the fracture and equal it with those called the ties.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	However, if you feel tags of the wishbone and their mauvasses, then do so on that and remove those tags to facilitate.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is held in the bone, then you invent an incision of it with one of the scissors that you have prepared for this, because you have placed the instrument after the wishbone, which serves the ciphaque; and this instrument is a staff or iron of which this is the form of it:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a hook of which this is the concavity; and its width according to that which you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the softness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of it should be second to what is possible in the operation; there should be two extremities, one wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the bone from the thigh is wide, and it is certain of pus, then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is narrow, or you fear pus, then fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the amount of the wound's incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if pus occurs, then pour in dressing that is warm and oiled and wet, and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the structure of the bone when it is wounded and cut be that you place an ointment made of flour of wheat and egg white on it, and place it over that. Then place the sphere behind the tissue of the bone, if necessary for that, and then take humid matter, which is the same as that of the Saracens, which should be long and its width of one palm or about that; and then place powder doubled on top of it and the ointment; and then place a thin cloth of the table with the width of which is three fingers and in length similarly; and then wrap that in dressing, and then place that dressing on top of the thin cloth in the location of the fracture; and then place humid matter as it is released, and roll that over the neck of the bone and behind the tissue of the patient, and then reduce that over all parts, and when the structure of the fracture is joined together, and that is what should not be hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And even if the bone above the broken bone is not fractured; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the bandage becomes soft or you replace the splint, then you should straighten it again and strengthen the joint.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's pillow on their shoulder, and place another pillow under their arm to support the patient's arm from the side of that person, and thus elevate the fracture of the sternum at the elevation of the muscle; or the arm of the patient is supported by the shoulder of that person.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage unless there is a wound or abscess in the place within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen the surface of the patient at that place, adjust it in the stricture and restore it, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the sternum has coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some treatments are made in months of that time in some people.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A splint is broken at the side of the patient, not broken by the patient but its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the patient's side is broken - and it is broken in the middle of the patient - and it is not known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare the patient and reduce it according to the natural figure in every possible way of engineering that is possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And place your hand over the powder of lime and honey; and place pulverized cloth on it; and place a thin layer of table salt according to the quantity of the splint or more than one.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the layer is concave at any of the places of the splint, then level that concavity with honey, and place the layer according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And apply strength above with blood and a bandage to the construction of the splint until it is not displaced from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the bandage in each day; and all the while it is softening, apply another bandage and strengthen it and straighten the limb if it remains in its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Place the patient on their left side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The splint is restored in 10 days or in 25 days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	When this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and you know that it is safe from the bones of which the beginning was not feared nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If you proceed from the location of the bone and place it under the skin, then you cut on it, hold it, and do as we said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio of abscess caut if something happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The chest is broken in some places of its middle and that ends badly; but the extremities of it remain unaffected and are not crushed or comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And when the patient's knee is broken, it tilts towards the sides and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting, and severe pain; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is to place the patient on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulder blades; and apply pressure to the muscles of the knee, and adjust the ribs of the patient to be in line with each other, and gently perform the operation of the knee and its equilibrium according to all possible methods that are appropriate and suitable for it, until the shape of the bone returns as it was.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place a poultice and bandage over the affected area, and place a soft cloth or a calf's bladder and similar materials on top of it, so that you can wrap it in cloth; and gently perform the operation on the broken bone so that it is not bruised; and apply some pressure to the wound as it becomes less painful, and strengthen the fracture appropriately; and consider the wound throughout the time, and when it becomes soft, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If necessary, to prevent the dissolution of that part of the corrosion or prolapse, pain, abscess that has occurred in that place, then you should take and remove that one and eradicate the ointment and correct what has happened due to that hand's method of healing for that person; and then return the ointment, if necessary, within the time it takes for them to be healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You should know that the fracture of the ribs does not occur in places as small as they are, but only in places where they meet and divide; and the extremities of those parts do not occur in those contractions except for those that are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And you should not be deceived by the appearance of that person, but rather by the investigation of that person and the said ones.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be as follows: that it equals the fracture according to the possible method, until it is covered by the skin, and then apply ointment and strengthen the broken bone with this one, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the parts underneath, then the patient experiences severe pain and puncture, as if with a puncture that occurs in someone who has coughed, and because of this, the bones push the bandage; and they experience difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ancients were skilled in that method with great skill.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they said: cover the patient's abdomen with something that generates inflation and warmth, so that the stomach is full and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the parts in front.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We should not do that to avoid causing an abscess, if it does not occur; and if it has already occurred, then we should help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they said to him that he should be placed above the wound and that something strong should be applied; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the wound will draw excess fluid to the area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they say to the patient: cover that place with wool that has already been submerged in heated oil, and place powders between the ribs until it is full, which should be equal to the amount you would use for the second application; and then cure the patient with the care of pleurisy of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient experiences severe constraint that they have not suffered before, and the bones puncture the bandage at the puncture site, place it over the patient, then cover the area, reveal the broken rib, and place your hand over the instrument that contains the cyst, the memory of which is preceded, and cut the bones to facilitate its removal.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the lips of the wound, if it is large, with gauze, and cure it with ointments until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if abscesses form in the wound, then you should cover and insert powders into heated oil and place it over the area, and cure the patient with that which covers the abscess formed.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him lie on his left side while he is being treated until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the sacrum of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some injuries often lead to fractures in the neck bones and their ligaments, as well as in the sacrum of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, consider the following: if their bones are already softened, stupefied, and dead and cannot move them, extend them, or strengthen them, and when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain in them, then know that they are not healed, and in these conditions, it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they feel pain in them when pressed with your fingers or pricked with a needle, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see similar conditions in the neck bones and want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you see that it has already been softened, if you notice that those things happen in the thighs, and when it is on its back, it becomes stiff and cannot defecate or urinate, and some people lie on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and therefore do not treat it.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If none of those things happen, the cause is better and less serious.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment of it is to perforate the abscess that you place on the spine, which is covered with warm oil or a few drops of honey; place some of those people on top of it during the day to sedate the abscess.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters on it, and strengthen it with a bandage; command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the part where the pain occurs until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if the tissue of the bone is separated or any other cause that is already separated from it, then cover it with a bandage and put that bone; and adjust the edges of the wound, with stitches if it is large; and cure it with some flesh of the animal's blood, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the back of the leg bones is broken, and it is at the end of the spine, then enter your left hand into the anus, and equalize the broken bones on the other hand as much as possible; and place a bandage and splint on it, if necessary, and strengthen that one.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel shattered bones in it, then perform surgery on that one, and stop that one, and cure the wound with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the restoration of the womb.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the womb are broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is only communication at the ends of those and they are inserted in length and decline to the parts of the bed; and the patient experiences pain in that location and puncture, and the cushion is surprised when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that one so that it is above the fracture, which is the figure of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in the extremity of it, then you should equalize it with the second one that you have at hand for equality, to enter as much as it is assembled to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the long or that already declines to the parts below, then you should make the patient lie on their belly between the time when it is prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have equalized it, place your hand on the plaster, and place your other hand on that star of wood or of codeine, and strengthen for stricture on the one that you do not fear puncturing of fracture or removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And equalize the concavity with that which places it inside when it takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if abscess occurs, then you should cease from extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and place your hand on that which sedates it according to what is preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen that which has cover.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if there are broken bones or they are crushed, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the arm.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Arm is what is between the ribs and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you grip it at the level of the meaty part of the shoulder according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And if it is tied in two ends of two bands, and then lifted up from the place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And the patient should lie on a bed; and then push out the broken arm through the meaty part of the shoulder until it reaches the tip of it in the middle place where the curve of the bone is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspended above that some heavy weight, or the servant extends it to the parts behind; and then the doctor should place it at the two ends of the fracture together, until the fracture returns according to its shape.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other handmaid is that the patient should be placed on their back and support their head with a cloth; then command two ministers to hold one under the fracture and the other behind them; and each of them extend to their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then press on the fracture with the cloth and on the other side with another cloth, and each of the two ministers extend their parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then cover that the middle of the cloth over the knee and the other behind the fracture towards the back.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly, if the fracture is towards the back, then cover that the cloth be placed on that place and on the back.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Equal to that in difficulty and work, and when it is applied according to what is covered and how it is applied, then press on that if there is no pus.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If a boil occurs, leave the stricture inside for seven days, and place a cloth soaked in warm water and oil over it until the boil is ready to be lanced, and then you should do that.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of lancing that boil is to place a poultice on the wound, and then wrap it in clean cloth; and then adjust your arm over that assistant, and place your hand on their muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And then wrap the cloth over the assistant's arm to prevent it from being in the way of the broken bone, if there is no other cause for that.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And then place that splint that is placed farther and stronger than the other splints; and between each splint, leave a space equal to the width of the broken bone, and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture plus three digits of each part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then place your hand on the stricture that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is necessary that your structure on the location of the fracture be more straight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture becomes longer, the structure is less.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you see the position of the bones and the structure as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its proper position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear abscess, then leave the structure and bones as we have said on day seven.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days to prevent it from occurring in the improper location or inflammation; or it is prohibited for food to arrive at the member by disposition of superfluity of structure; and therefore, correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are sure that no cause of this occurs, then do not release the ligament for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's head be on their back, and their hands be over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place your hand on the assistant completely covered in wool equally, and consider at all hour of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not delayed nor dissolved, or that the ligament is not softened, therefore correct everything according to your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And pause the patient's food according to the order we have given, unless the food is delicate at the beginning until it is digested; and later cover that food from him.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	It is customary for the helper and the pillow of the patient to be changed every ten days; and later cover that they are removed, washed, and administered with drugs that correct that one.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is not healed, then you do not remove that bandage and those splints within a day or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of the restoration of the arm fracture.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the radius and ulna; the first is small, and that one is the one that is placed on top, and the second is large and that one is the one that is placed below, from the part that is left on top.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the larger bone is broken alone, or the smaller one, and if they are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small intestine is pierced above, its restoration would be difficult, and its healing would be more difficult.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the large intestine is pierced below its fracture, its healing would be bad, and its healing would be difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And it is even worse when two bones are pierced.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is pierced by the small intestine above, it is convenient for the doctor to facilitate its healing by placing a small extension to prevent further damage.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large intestine is that which is pierced, then it is necessary to place an extension with more force.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both intestines are pierced at the same time, then it is necessary to place an extension with more force.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary to place the hand figure of the patient over the restoration of the intestine and the extension of the intestine extended on a cushion, and the patient's arm should be above all others, and the ear should be lower than all others, and the patient should lie on a cushion laid down.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion under their head or back, to prevent the patient from moving too much.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And the assistant extends their arm from the side furthest from the patient's head or chest, and another assistant does the same on the other side.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the doctor straightens the bones that can be reduced to their best possible position.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are splinters in the fracture of the bone, then carefully remove all of them from their place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there is a separate splinter that has penetrated the skin but does not give you hope of restoring it, then remove it and follow the method we mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is in a place that is difficult to reach, you have already treated something similar, and therefore take care of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then line the wound with a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, and apply it gently between thinness and subtlety, and place a strong cloth over that subtle structure until the abscess has drained; and then remove the cloth and apply an ointment prepared from powdered myrrh and clay, and place bandages on it.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you know that the number of ribs in the arm is in the major positions, or if it is a fracture in one bone or two bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your hand more strongly and more forcefully over the location of the fracture, and when you apply pressure to the parts above the fracture or the parts below it, place your hand a little softer as it is preceded by the remembrance of the fracture at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft cloths, not hard or rough, and the best one is the one that is strengthened to be just between subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and the limb close to these days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs of which correction is necessary, as it has already occurred to the member, and then make sure that you put the member in cold water before that problem stops.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And do not keep the member compressed until it recovers, and then return the pressure.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the contraction has already softened and the bone has been replaced and is similar to those, then with your skill, correct all of that.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive stricture, then gradually loosen that one a little and let it heal for several days until the nourishment reaches it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then do not let it be dislodged for about 20 days or around those times.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then suspend the hand of the patient over them for their skill in moving and make them sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you should know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or if it is well-healed, it is restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the condition of the complications and the disposition of the skill.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the palm of the hand and those mentioned.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	When pressing on the patient's abdomen and the knots of the mentioned tart, be aware that this may cause a fracture, and do not force it unless absolutely necessary.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the patient has a fracture or is in danger, make sure they lie flat and evenly, and place your hand over their chest to prevent them from moving.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the assistant extends the broken bones and the doctor sets them with good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And make sure to apply a poultice and bandage, but be careful not to cause an abscess; and place this above the area according to its size, and you have already covered it with cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	However, if the tart is in the parts of the abdomen, then make it similar to a poultice of cloth, and command the patient to hold this against their abdomen; make sure it is well pressed.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the poultice of cloth should be in the one that is lifted, so that the belly is applied to the abdomen; and press it according to what is necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is at the parts of the forearm, then place your hand on the other side of the part and the palm, so that the wound is exposed and straight; and then place the structure, as if it were rolled up in a bandage between the said arm and the body.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if the fracture occurs in any of the knuckles of the said hand, then if it is possible, apply it as second best, place your hand on the palm and if you wish, place a small straight piece under it so that the fracture is elevated and not crushed.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in any of the other said parts, such as the middle, or the index, or the ear, or the ring finger, then apply it as second best, place your hand on the said finger and if you wish, place all the others continuously, which is better; or place over that small piece, as we have said in the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your treatment, and place that, the position of abscess cauterization and oppose — at the said operation — to that which covers when any cause of those occurs, according to what is repeated about it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the repair of the fracture of the bone in the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh are broken and it is declared at second sight that they have been converted to the first part and the most inferior.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the repair of it is done as follows: one bandage is stretched over the fracture and another bandage is placed under the fracture, and the patient lies on their back and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And the assistant then extends the bandage to its full length along the part of the bone where the fracture is.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is necessary to extend to the bottom of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed at the back of the knee along the part of the bone where the fracture is, so that the extension can be in front, and the other bandage under the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the fracture is extended to the bottom of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed at the back of the knee and the extension to the parts behind.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the doctor should gently massage the swollen joints until they return to their natural shape and the bone is joined by good union; then cover with an ointment and bandage, unless the member becomes abscessed.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	However, if the abscess occurs in the joint, then leave it for several days until the abscess opens, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage should be made as follows: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it twice or three times, and then remove any excess; and then place the pillow under the calf and the back of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And introduce a long, thin cloth between the thigh and the pillow near the knee, and bring the ends of the cloth from the most upper part of the two sides, and then roll it over the pillow and the thigh to cover any excess of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place your hand on the thigh in the location of the fracture, and place a plate over the bones of the pillow.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the empty spaces between the chest and the cushion with many cloths, to prevent the constriction from being dislodged.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin the constriction strongly from above over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and the more you approach the edge of the fracture location, your constriction should be smaller and looser and wetter.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend two extremities of the sheet to the parts where it enters the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the other part to prevent the cloth from being dislodged from its location.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then lay the constriction over that, so that it does not cause harm to the member with corrosion or abscess or inflammation and similar things to those; and if any of those causes occurs, then count yourself as dislodged from it, and rectify what has happened immediately, according to what we have said before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if in the bone there is an opening of the bone that puts it, then try to equalize it according to what is possible for you; and if not, perform on it and dislodge it, and cure that which is preceded by the remembrance within which it should be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Some of the splints are strengthened to hold this fracture of the rib cage or others that are adjusted to its ribs, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in the restoration of it in such a way that no injury occurs to the patient's leg; and if it is restored alone, another thing should be applied to the other cushion, as soon as necessary for it to rest.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the rib cage is strengthened in ten days or a few more or a few months, and all of this depends on the diversity of the conditions and the other arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder blade.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that the fracture of the shoulder blade occurs in various ways, but it does not affect the surrounding splints.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it does affect the fracture, then it is only a crack or tear in its parts, and that is called a sprain or sprains, and over that all is based on the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it should be equal to what was broken from its parts due to the aforementioned enterocut, and it should be attached and joined according to what is possible for equality, ease, and convenience.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then place a bandage over that round stone, if necessary for that one; and strengthen the structure above it in a suitable manner.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then consider all the dispositions that we have mentioned in other fractures, such as an abscess and similar to those that would be placed on the whole accident according to what is suitable for it to be healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the ribs there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the rib; and the other is thin and is called the cartilage.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And depending on the type of fracture that occurs in those two bones of the arm, and for that reason, the restoration of it is made in a similar manner to the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If both bones are broken at once, the cushion becomes useless in all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the most delicate bone is broken, the cushion becomes useless to the teeth.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the largest bone is broken, it is usually due to one of those causes that you cannot prevent.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension and equality and ligation of the splints according to that balance.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the bone fracture of the leg is not healing due to severe swelling, then the extension should be less and looser, and it will benefit your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is sometimes an operation on the arm, and it is when you balance the splints and complete the entire operation, then you will take weights of iron that are placed next to the causes that are placed in soldiers, and they are made entirely of palm leaves; they are of those that are small and not large, and it should be the longest of those according to the length of the leg, and the deepest inside.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each in a cloth of two folds according to its length, and place one on the part of the bed on one side and the other on the other side, and let the end enter the lowest part of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the three folds of the cloth in three places of the bed's extremities and at the middle, because with this structure the bed is prohibited from tilting to the right and left side, and it is good for stability.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a small board of wood according to the length of the bed has been administered; and it is placed on the bed to prevent it from moving.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially be careful that you do this in fracture, and when it is properly placed.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the bed in each day and study that which is behind for study, and you guard it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and if something happens to those, then pause at the bed until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus and bones of the foot and their types.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The talus does not suffer from fracture in all cases; rather, the bones of the foot sometimes suffer fracture in some ways; and the toes do not suffer fracture, but only an injury in their position.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot suffer fracture and sometimes those bones are lifted up from among them, then the patient should be placed on the prepared ground as if walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place one foot on that which is lifted from those bones, and step on them, and press, and equalize them until they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then place a poultice and a bandage on top, and place a small table under the foot of the patient with two ends.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that bandage to the foot structure below, because you have wrapped it with cloth and other causes of which it is in need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And if the patient has passed three or four days, then you should remove the bandage, where you found the bones level, or fractured or dislocated, and the operation in those cases is with cautions.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if he says they are fractured, then you should restore those, and level them as they were before, and recommend to you in the restoration of those from the method of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place the second plaster along the length of the fracture, and put a little cotton on it; then move the foot to this table that is recommended to you, and strengthen that with a proper bandage.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if that which is fractured from the bones is two or three or more, then you should place on each part of the length covered with cloth lion, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and be standing on one of the caps of the table facing the belly of the foot so that it has a good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes that have been told to you in other fractures of accidents that we have said; and pause at all accidents with that which covers.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the jaw of the woman and the bone of the little finger and the vertebra of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the jaw of the woman is fractured, then perform that surgery in a clean place, and lean it against the side of her back, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife should put her hand in the jaw of the woman, and do it in the same way; and the woman should be gently struck, and her back raised little by little, until everything is aligned and the fractured bone returns to its place.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powders on her back, and when she wants to urinate, facilitate the back and collect the urine, and reduce and return that second in the way it was before, and then return to its first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around those, until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take one sheep's bladder and strengthen it on the neck of the woman with a catheter; and introduce the whole bladder into her jaw, and then blow through the catheter until the bladder is inflated inside the jaw, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with warmth and bedding for several days after the operation until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bones of a man or woman are fractured, then administer in the restoration and needle insertion into that which we have recommended for the bone of the thigh.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is drained should not be hidden in these nearby fractures and that it does not happen, mainly to the one who has some study and uses and understands this my free writing; because that fracture means to you in the greater dispositions via dreyturiera in the restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore understand be.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	And when the man's leg is fractured, take guarguamela of oak, and put the fracture in that; and then place your hand on it wrapped in cloth, and wrap it, and then lay it for three days or around those, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of bone fractures when they are infected.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the one who has suffered a fracture, especially if the bone is large and similar to the bone of the thigh or of the calf, or a similar bone, that you take precautions and use a saw as soon as the conditions for amputation are present, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the fracture occurs in a clean manner, you should take precautions to retain it in place, unless you powder it with three-grain size dust, if there is another cause.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that day, and do not prolong it, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs carefully, you should leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, before the abscess disappears, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause more harmful accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is significantly above the knee, uncover it and reduce it by puncturing it, equalizing it with your hands at the least extension and the most pain.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not to your preparation and the equilibrium of it is in your hands, then reduce that to your hands with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight feet, and its width according to the quantity of the wound; and for that reason it is necessary for the doctor who uses those three or four according to the quantity that is needed in the cure in all cases of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And if it is broken, and is in the place where it is greasy so that it does not bend the handle over it at the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And if it is sharp at the end where there is margin in its extremities; and if it is under it to the largest tendons, and from the top of it into the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", so it is a greasy palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For that reason, cover it with a pad placed at the end of it raised above the extremity of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And insert him into a bed where he returns his bones, and it is equal to some balance.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then try to equalize the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of it is thin, and you do not take that tool for good reason, then you should insert the extremity of that bone into where the tool has power over that.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce all the bones to that position, then insert that tool which has been recommended for it from the scissors that we have mentioned; or saw that tool in some way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then remove those that are in the bones of roughness and small scratches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bones are reduced, and the reduction causes the patient great pain, then you should know that the bones have not returned to their natural position; and therefore do what you consult with the patient greatly.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is completed, which you do to the bones, then submerge a cloth in vinegar that is black and properly if it is in summer, and do not place it on the wound or any other cause in which it may be oil, so that it does not cause further damage and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And at the appropriate time during the bone's healing process, administer splints and leave the wound uncovered to allow the formation of new tissue, using bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to strain the wound on the fracture, as this is what the wise doctors have advised against, and they would cause more harm by making it worse or causing it to rot or become infected, which could lead to further complications.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the fracture is loose, soft, and different from other fractures, it should be handled differently.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or bad, and you are concerned about the possible complications mentioned earlier, and there is pain in the area, then do not place splints on it, but rather use a hard cloth bandage instead of splints and strap it firmly to the area.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the wound begins to close after one or two days, remove the cloth that was placed over it and apply ointment, using those that we usually use to treat wounds, such as quadrifarmacon and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is advisable for you to remove the bandage and consider the pain at each hour during the day and night until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pain flows from it to the parts ahead to facilitate healing.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the pain lasts for several days and is not consolidated or abscinded from it, then know that this is a sign of small wounds, so ask about the pain to test them.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those small wounds, those that remain separated and are remanded and extracted, those that do not separate and put the member and make it painful, perforate them to incise those that are possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain is zuchem or eluchen, it is a sign of some kind of corruption and putrefaction, then ensure that you place one of those that are appropriate for the cure of which the previous description in its own chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that in which you should follow the best advice and you make present your pessary: when the large ones are cut, emerge over the member as if they were the bones of the body and the helper and similar to those of the large members, and do not assume attraction of it, nor its extraction, which may occur after several days; having left that inside for a while, because strong leu will come after about 20 or 30 days; and then cure the pain if you see it, and if not, leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of nodes that occur at the site of a certain fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Swellings often occur at the site of a fracture healing, and especially near joints, and they are caused by the shape of the limb; and this greatly prevents the limb from performing its natural function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, consider if the swelling is recent and administer in those medicines that have stopped bleeding, such as aloes, and senna, and mirabilis, and serpentaria, and acrasia, and similar to those; and take some or all of them, and apply them to the swelling on a cloth, and place it on the swelling, and tightly bind it over it for good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And loosen the bandage that does not cause pain for several days; and remove it and apply another, until the swelling has subsided; or strengthen it over the flat disc of lead, which has the property of returning everything that is inflamed in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the bone has already become hard and strained, and it is necessary to cause pain to that part, then cut it through the most suitable part of it, and scrape off the excess and eminent, or remove that part with a sharp tool before it becomes calcified; and cure that part before it becomes healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the broken bone is restored and placed back in its natural position, but it is not as subtle and smooth as before.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When the broken bone is restored and placed back in its natural position, but it is not as subtle and smooth as before, this is due to many causes: one of which is the lack of solution of the ligament and the cord of that part made not according to its time; or because there is too much stricture of the ligaments before the nutrient can run to the member; or because there is too much excessive embrocation; or because there is too much superfluous movement not in its proper time; or because there is weakness in the body of the patient and because of the debility of that part.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The treatment for this is to apply heat to the patient and make their heart beat faster until the pulse becomes multiple; and administer a bath, and apply a mustard plaster and liniment on them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then place a bandage on the member, so that the bandage attracts the necessary nourishment, or continue with the application of warm water to remove the impurity, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	The treatment of broken bones that have been healed incorrectly and prevented from being operated on due to the cold.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When an injury occurs to a member that has already been healed, it is necessary to remove the disfigurement and elevation of the broken bone and swelling, and to shape the member in the form of the limb, but if the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, then do not receive the word of that person who exists that the member is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But if it has already been done by foolish doctors and healers who have done this in our world, and this operation is very reprehensible because it causes great fear of the disease which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the cramps and stiffness are recent, then apply a poultice made of water mixed with softening herbs such as althea roots and chamomile, and melilot, and similar ones; and make this into a poultre using dill that is well prepared. Or use a poultice made of ground chamomile petals and mixed with honey or oil of camomile, and apply it to the affected area. Or use a poustained by the addition of figs crushed and mixed with butter, and similar to those used for medicines called consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some remedies are dissolved in an abundant amount of water and applied to the most humid parts of the body, and administered for the movement of the limb at all parts in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the twisting has already become severe and is hardened and turned into stone and causes the need for cure by iron, then apply the pus under the affected part and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and scrape off any excess from the joint with a fine saw, and administer relief in that place due to the worry and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is an injury to one of the joints of the body, which prevents movement, and distorts the figure of the member, and causes severe pain and great injuries on the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when an injury occurs in dislocation, it is advisable to reduce it as soon as possible, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very painful, and that is why it is difficult to reduce dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And to avoid this, it is not advisable to be too fat or tense during the inflammation stage, because sudden movements cause spasms and slow pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, it is advisable to approach the patient's bedside, and wait until the inflammation subsides; then apply heat to the member with hot water and oil, and then reduce it with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the entire limb should be treated with that which the memory of what will return to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the capital letters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the shoulder, it enters into the part that was previously behind.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24:
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	About the cure of dislocation of the jaw below.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the lower jaws are not tart; and the dislocation of the other is made in one of two ways: that they are remapped to their places by a little removal, and they are slightly mollified; or they are completely dislocated and closed, until they are mollified at the part of the joint where the saliva of the patient flows and which cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his palate.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of it is slight, then return it to its place in the best positions if possible.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and closed, then it should be administered reduction of it gradually, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the patient's head, and the surgeon should insert his fingers in the patient's mouth, on one side of the jaw, if the dislocation is on one side; or if the dislocation is on both sides, he should insert his two fingers in the middle, and the other parts of the patient's mouth should be held by others, and commanded the patient to stop biting and let go of each part; and the surgeon should equalize the jaw and push it back into place before it returns to its original position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer euphoria with warm water and oil, until the reduction of both is made without delaying the reduction of both.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And then when they are realigned and the mouth is closed and not molded, then place a dressing of cloth over those wounds, and make it with cera and oiled; and apply a bandage to facilitate the healing of the wounds.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient lie on their back, and let the head of the patient be between two pillows, so that it does not tilt to the right or left; and do not force any cause; having the proper view, then open the jaw, wait until the pain is relieved and the jaw is unlocked, then open that which you want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And that should be administered with ease, and do not force the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, and swallowing until the jaw is unlocked and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated in some hour and are not converted to their proper places, then use hot compresses, frequent baths, and constant soda, and the stomach of the patient should be strengthened, and frequently vomiting pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see that, then know that it is a bad sign; and frequently hot compresses will kill that person in a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The clavicle is not dislocated from the shoulder due to its connection with the chest; and some fractures are dislocated at the front part, and that is felt.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And its restoration is that the patient jumps on their own two feet and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then cut the wound with your strong hand, as it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then place a poultice and powders on that wound and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	If the extremity of that which is bent and connected with it, is not dislocated on any day; then cover it and reduce and bandage it according to what we have said and according to what is in your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then place a poultice, powders, and compression on that wound, and command the patient to adhere to rest and quiet until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this particular treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its original location.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the shoulder joint.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second way is when it is dislocated above the muscle, and this is done sharply; and it is not dislocated at the back joints by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front joints by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most commonly dislocated and deformed and stuck at the shoulder joints, and more often in those in which the flesh is thin, usually it is pushed out easily; but in those in which there are thick muscles, it is pushed out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And many people suffer from trauma or injury, and the muscle of which is inflamed with abscess, and it is affected by this because it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then, proceed carefully as you are overwhelmed by the patient's condition, and continue with their treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	It is known as dislocation when the parts behind the tilt are separated; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you find differences between them; and at the top of the concave part of the muscle, behind the tilt, you touch the tip of the muscle like a hook, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to its usual position, nor move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you should press or elevate it, and you should carefully touch the affected area, and do not hide it.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	This dislocation is called "reduction" when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction of this is that the practitioner elevates the hand of the patient above the parts behind the tilt; and then places their fingers behind the tilt of the patient, and strengthens the joint in its usual position, and the practitioner elevates the hand of the patient, and extends it in its place; and then pauses there as it returns naturally.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If the pain does not subside by what we have said, and since it is known that the dislocation occurred at the beginning, for several days, let the patient be bathed in warm water and given a decoction that softens and melts, such as if they have high-pitched voices, fenugreek, and mallow in water, and let them be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then let the patient be placed on their back and supported under their chest with a cushion that is even between elevation and restriction, and let the doctor place their hand on the patient's shoulder, elevate the head of the muscle by virtue, and pull the hand of the patient to prevent it from being dislocated again, and another servant hold the head of the patient, so that it does not become dislocated again, because at this point it returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it by this method: and it is that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and stand on the side of the patient, and insert their muscle behind the tilting of the patient and elevate the tilting of the patient to the parts above until the patient is suspended in air, and another servant pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below their belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the patient is heavy, then first check if another cause is suspected, so that great harm may not occur, because dislocation often returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced by another method: place a long board on the ground, shaped like a mortar, which is not too thick or thin, and place it under the patient; then cover the patient's head with a lion cloth, and the patient should stand along the length of the board, and extend the hand of the other part to the parts behind the other part; and strengthen the joint of the other part, because the joint returns to its place at speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it by all the causes we have mentioned, then use this cure: and you should take a stick of the length of two arms, and its width should be four spans, and its thickness should be narrowed at the end of the handle in the shape of a button:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place a lion's head cloth over their head to prevent them from moving.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place your hand or arm on the patient's chest, extend it over their body parts, and tie the cloth on their arm and hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then place one arm on a ladder according to the latitude, extend your hand over their body parts, and the other person should hold the other side, as the joint will enter soon.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument of the patient is completed according to each possible method, and then cover the area around their head with a wool blanket of equal quantity; and apply prepared plaster made of ground barley and albumen over all the muscle, as it should be turned over, and place a bandage under their head, and leave them, and do not move their hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And cover the patient's food with a few cloths, until their member is comfortable, as it is better for their healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And if the wound is given more closeness to the seventh or fifth rib and is exercised with a movement; then if it is stopped and not softened, it has already been healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	And if the joint is dislocated by moisture that has occurred to it or by another cause, then as stated in the chapter on cautery, apply a pointed cautery three times at that point.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandage and splint are reduced over that place some more, and it is not healed and catheterized and cannot raise that arm to the parts above, then you know that the nerves of that joint, which are at the top of the muscle, have been cut or stretched or softened, and you know that the joint will never be healed in that place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Of the dislocation of that which is made from the chest and the breastbone or the parts behind, reduction is made by impulse and extension by the most, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And apply the other remedy in that area, and cure it while it is healing.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing of the limb is delayed and movement is slow, then use wet bandages to help it heal and return to its original state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and also returns with difficulty; and if it is dislocated at all parts, especially at the part facing the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you where it is located behind the skin or behind the touch, according to some figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the shoulder dislocated, if it is not straight, that is a clear sign, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And when you see the wound, reduce the dislocation as soon as possible until it comes to the abscess cauterization, because if you see the abscess cauterization, the reduction is difficult, and not always healed; and especially when it is at the parts behind, because it is worse than all other species of dislocation, and more pain, and more bandages away from that to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient be extended in two ways, and the arm of the patient be expanded, and the hands of the doctor are on the back and under the patient, and he pushes the joint towards the toes of his hands, or at the base of his palm where it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is at the joints, then return it by bending the hand against the back of the hand, until it hits the base of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and forceful movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two assistants extend the arm, and another two assistants hold him so that he does not remain unconscious from the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate the arm through its entire range of motion, so that it is wrapped in a folded cloth or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint at his hand, apply some oil to it so that it is one of those causes that help in the lubrication of the joint and facilitate its return.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of that cavity which is placed on that pad where there is sterility and execution of an albuminous solution of honey, and it is extracted from the stricture descent, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and it is left for a certain time.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it is released; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you release the ligament of it and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strong, then you repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave that for a certain time until it is extracted; and then release it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if there is an accident to the joint during reduction, and its position is in movement, then administer moisture in baths and subtle friction, and compresses, until it is removed; or pause on the joint immobilized, that is a greasy bandage; and then it is tied, and left over the bone for a day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then leave that, and put that in the bath; and when it is over, then you friction the joint with cooled friction, and then repeat on the immobilized one, that is a roller of movement, a week, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	When inserting the instrument of bath, enter gently.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place your hand on the wound of a freshly slaughtered cow and cover it with salt; then make some incisions, as that wound is moist and reduce it to its proper state.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is at the joint that is between the arm and the chest.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The shoulder is dislocated in some ways, and the reduction of this dislocation is difficult, but it is important to act quickly when it occurs, so that the joint does not become inflamed or something happens to the inflammation in the joint.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of this dislocation is that you place the joint of the shoulder of the patient on a table and the assistant extends the arm of that person, and the doctor places his hand or his palm on the edge of the joint, and pushes it back to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, if the palm is already open at the belly of the patient, then place the patient's back on a table and extend and reduce it; and if the dislocation is previous, then the position of the patient should be inherently on the table, so that the surgeon can be near the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if he returns soon, it is good; and if not, then apply this ointment to the abscess and leave that; and do not repeat it, because otherwise, it will not be softened or healed before the days pass.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, if the joint is still tortuous; and the patient does not know any cause, but the back is softened and cannot be strengthened; then you should know that the nerves are cut or torn, and you should not engage in it, but strengthen it with a pointed cautery at the joint and strongly apply this to it.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And when the abscess has returned, then place it on the ointment that we have recommended, and leave it and strengthen it for several days; and afterwards, it should be removed and left alone, and the back should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the patient's movement is obstructed and they are experiencing some gravity, then apply a cold water catheter and some friction to their back, until they are relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of the aforementioned dislocations.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes these dislocations occur at any part.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of these joints is dislocated at the back of the hand or in the abdomen, then grasp the joint and push the dislocation towards the elbows, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the joint, and suspend the weight of that arm to the side where it is dislocated, and leave it like that for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is equal to the other side on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is not ready, apply the second method to that joint, and do not cease to slide it in the day and exercise its movement, and apply it at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient's abdomen is dislocated, and it is attached to that part, and then perform the first surgical operation on it before it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And if it is dislocated in other parts, do the same.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the dorsal vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the dorsal or neck vertebrae, and it remains motionless, then in that case there is no cure, as death approaches the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And in such cases, the patient's bowel movements are not under their control, and they cannot retain it; and the muscles of those members or the ribs of that area or the ribs of that area or one of those, or if a vertebra remains motionless, then the muscles are softened and the removal is made in four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then it is already removed to the back parts and is called a lumbar hernia.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	When the cure of that person is that you usually consider if the frigidity has occurred from childhood, because in that case neither the cure nor the healing of that is possible for all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In those that are seen for castration or percussion or similar to those, as the ancients said about the methods of cure in prolix speech, of which the most returns with profit; however, I have already opened and exposed that from which few are exempt due to its proximity to the understanding and exposure, which he has exposed and formed with various instruments of that, by which he will show this and explain it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And say that in frigidity that occurs from the part of the chest, there is neither cure nor healing of that; and similarly in that which is made to two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, there is not cured except that which occurs in the back properly, which he recommends.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the patient be extended on his face with his arms stretched out equally close to the wall, and be stretched out after that instrument is moistened so that the chest of that is not exposed.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then place a stick straight under them, resting their back on the ground at the end of the bed around their head, and another stick in front of their feet on the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The assistant should hold the stick, and not be stationary in the pit; and another assistant should hold the other one according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then cover their head with a cloth and leave the Lion's tongue firm; and extend the end of the Lion's tongue to the stick that should be under their head, and tie it there; and then strengthen the other leather strap over their ankles and knees, and should their belly; and then adjust all the leathers and tie them on the other stick that should be under their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the assistant should extend the leather strap to the part of the stick, and not remain lying on both sticks and their places where they have been placed, but rather not be stationary as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his hands on the strong back between the shoulder blades, or on a table, and adjusts his feet on the table until he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If he does not return by this method, then take a table with a length or width of three elbows, and hollow out in the wall where we said that the patient should lie between the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the edge of the table on the back, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and carefully pushes until the back is compressed and he returns to his place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the back that is rolled on the mat; and it is that you should be on your knees with the patient's head in the back of the two poles, the length of which is an arm, and the patient's head in the back of the other pole; and the length between each pole should be a palm, and it has been made in each pole through which the back turns, and each one should be firmly fixed on the ground so that it does not bend.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be another rod, in which the other end is a handle, and it should be rolled in the two openings of the two rods.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a hole in which the rod is formed, its length being one palm, and that which is rolled is similar to this.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the ropes that you have tied in the chest of the patient in the hole, and the ropes that you have tied on the thighs of the patient in the handle, which should be used to hold the feet of the patient.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each rope should be turned and a minister who turns the rope with his hand, as we have said before.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the rope:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the spine is turned and the area is covered, then cover it with dry earth, and stop; and then place a flat board of the width of three fingers or about those, and the length of which is the amount that covers the wound, and on the side of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then tie a bandage around the area that we have called, and use the patient as a source of subtle nourishment until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any imminence in the location at the end of the healing, then cover that with medicines that moisturize and clean the area for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is already administered in that location, plaster of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some vertebrae may have imminence at the back of the spine, and it is used for that dislocation; and that bone which has already immined for that reason, so that it does not cover that it should be made into a pompholyx, because this medicine will do you great harm.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not only end in dislocation, but also in those that occur in other small removals and concavities.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the wide is dislocated in four ways, either at the parts behind, or at the parts forward, or at the parts above, or at the parts behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is mostly dislocated at the parts behind, and rarely at the parts above or at the parts behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And when the dislocation of the patient to the parts behind is great, when you adjust the pillow for the healthy person, it is longer and the healthy person's knee is more bent than the other, and the sick person cannot bend their own knee, and this is where the pus from an abscess enters, so that the head of the pillow has already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And when the sickness to which the dislocation happens is at the parts forward, it is because the accidents of the patient are opposite to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And when the sickness to which the dislocation happens is at the parts above, it is because the pillow is spread out too much, but it does not bend that part where there is pain in the knee, and if it is perforated to go out and cannot be placed above that part; and the urine of the patient is retained and the sore on the patient is an abscess, and you must place the patient's side on the bed.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And if the person to whom the dislocation occurred in the parts behind is unable to extend their elbow, nor can they bend the elbow of the other that bends towards them, and the cushion under them is shorter than the other, and the bending is softened, and the head of the cushion is placed at that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of these special cases of this dislocation is that you consider, in this case, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been reduced by someone else, then follow its arrangement, but not entirely; and therefore do not expect that in this case it should be done improperly.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case of the person whose dislocation is recent, and is one of the four types of dislocations, you should turn the joint and extend it to the parts behind and to the parts in front, and to the right and left, which will return it and not require any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this way, then expect that you prepare a strong cautery and extend the cushion of the part behind the patient's elbow, or at his hands, or on the bandage that is placed over the cushion above the elbow; and another minister should extend the hand of the patient above the fingers of the elbow, and hold another minister to clean the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if the extension is from the shoulder to the sternum, or from the back to the waist.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if the extension is of all those in one movement while the patient is raised to his own side and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is specific to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary for every special case to say what is appropriate for its own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own dislocation, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the parts below, place the patient on his own side; and place your hand on the rim of the cushion in that place where the head of the cushion and the place that is left are near each other; and extend the band to the part of the angle to the most distant part of the sternum.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another assistant should strongly grasp the patient's arms, and press the large part of the patient's cushion and extend to the parts below by forceful extension, so that it returns to its own place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this special position is the least painful cure for which this member is reduced compared to other positions.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	However, if it is not possible to maintain this position of treatment for the entire time, then hold the patient's feet together with a strong rope, lighter than others, above their knees and below their hips.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each rope should be equal to four fingers, and the patient's bed should be extended by two fingers more than the other.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And the patient should be suspended from the top of the bed, and in the middle; and the length of it from the ground should be equal to two fists.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong young man to reduce the head of the cushion, and another young man should be suspended with the patient, and the other young man should press the cushion with force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	However, in the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the shoulder joint, then have the patient lie on their back as recommended; and tighten the ligaments over the patient's shoulder properly and over their chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then place two cushions under them, one under their feet and the other under their head; and then adjust the cushion under their chest on top of which they are covered with blankets, so that the patient is not suffocated by the cushion being between their thighs, so that the extension to the parts behind is not pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each assistant extends their part, and the doctor places their hand on the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you follow the reduction, it is usually very successful; and if not, place your hand carefully on that as we have said in the book for that purpose.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May they be able to move their arms freely.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is to the parts behind, then it is important that the cushion is extended wider, and according to this method narrative about the patient; and the doctor places the palm of their hand on the long axis of the injured person, and with the other hand they pull that, and with that grip they extend the part behind to the part of the dislocation.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is at the back parts, it is not recommended that the patient be extended to the other parts and raised on the ground; having covered them with a hard cause, as mentioned earlier, if the hip joint of the patient is dislocated forward, as we have said about the bedding of the patient between two pillows; and it is on their face and the limbs are extended, as mentioned earlier, there is no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it should be applied with compression on the table over the area where the joint is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is completed as mentioned earlier, and the assistant of the reduction of the patient does not leave you, and you extend two pillows from the patient, and when you see that they are equal, and the patient extends their other pillow and expands that side, then you know that the member, as mentioned earlier, has returned to its place; and then you adjust two cushions and press and extend the bend as if the limb is not damaged in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then remove the bandage and apply it again, and place one cushion under the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see those joints correctly in the right position, then you know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softness, then return and apply that, and extend it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then remove that, and make that walk in the ward every day until she is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways, either at the front parts, or at the back parts, or behind and in front; but it is not dislocated at the inner parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to place their cushion on the side; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all the patient's limbs is done by placing the patient on their side, unless they can already support themselves; place your hand on their face, and hold their foot between your legs; and then make them grasp your hands with their palms, and bring those hands to the back of their neck for strength, and another minister extends their leg inside so that the intestine returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And then, when lifting the patient, their bed should adhere to the cushion that does not labor.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then, place that plaster on it and make the bed adhere to the cushion, and apply those same plasters to one bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's bed for walking for several days, until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of the patient to you is excused, then in the treatment of the hand previously mentioned cure, apply strong extension to the tendons of which.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter thirty-three.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle sometimes becomes swollen due to small removal, and sometimes it is dislocated in the complement, and the dislocation of it is made at the joints or at the bones.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the symptom of its dislocation is that sometimes the ankle swells due to the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The cure of its removal is a difficult task, and it is that it should be extended with ease to the hands and return within a short time.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In its treatment when it is dislocated in the complement, one should do as follows: have the patient lie on his back, and hold a strong and capable man behind him at the joint of the ankle.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then you should place your left hand on the uppermost part of the foot, and your right hand on the lower part of the leg in the location of the hollow.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then pull the foot towards your right hand, and hold it with your left hand for two joints, and extend your left hand; and push the foot downwards against the ground three times.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make two incisions according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And place the patient's chest on the clean incision, and you go to the cavity.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, return in one incision or in two according to this method, and if you see the foot equal, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation, until it returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing the patient in this way, then have the patient lie on their side on the ground, and place a support under them, and place a pillow between their thighs, and you have already covered them with a cloth so that they do not descend.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And the assistant of the patient holds their limbs, and another assistant extends the foot to their hands or to the cloth that lies on the back of the foot; and the assistant extends each one against the extension of their own part, and the pillow is extended between the thighs of the patient retaining that, so that the thing of the patient is not thrown away from its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor should then align the dislocation at its proper place, and another servant should hold the clean cushion at the parts behind, where the dislocation returns to its ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and is declared to you as being healthy from its reduction, then pause to apply a strong bandage around it, and tie the foot to the bed.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful not to trample or harm the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over that part does not cause pain and strengthens it greatly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it like that for two or three days; if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then remove it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to walk after removing that space, do not do so safely until the dislocation has completely dissolved and been corrupted, and then that which does not require treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess occurs in that place, then be careful to administer the same cure as described earlier, in another location for treatment and ointment, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter thirty-four.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the treatment of the aforementioned gout in the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	That which is dislocated should be extended slightly more than its normal range of motion; and this is not difficult, but rather easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in one of the joints of the back of the foot, then cover the patient's foot with a cloth or on a table, and be present there as if you were going to do it.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then approach the patient's foot, and place your hand on what is close to the joints, and gently push that part of the foot back into its proper position until you see it return to its normal position without appearing in the prominent location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place a table that covers the entire foot of the patient underneath it, which has two lids, and apply strong pressure to the structure in a decent and firm manner for three days; and then remove that and let it rest for several days until it is strong and its recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter thirty-five
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the special types of dislocation that can be caused by injury or fracture or any other means.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occurs, and you perform surgery on the treatment of that and its restoration, unsuccessful procedures can lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that reason, do not presume to treat it, but rather the one that is known in the art, with long use, mercy and pity, late, not hot, or presumptuous; and that uses in the beginning of medicines that give way to abscesses cautiously, and leave the patient to divine judgment, only to the one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, but rather for relief from the disease, and in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then try to do something about it as soon as possible in the beginning of the cause, giving way to abscess cautiously.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as soon as you want, then administer a regimen that gives way to abscess cautiously and cures the injury with the remedy that is suitable for it from the drying agents.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the stable bones that are separated, then pierce their membranes, and do what we have said in the simple cases of that in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid the second of that tool in the ways of fear according to what my preaching has preceded you; because that is better for you to do your own Creator, and more enduring to your glory, and more salutations to your own body as you will see those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	This ends the words of Albucasis perfectly from which God may not be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
