Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Here begin the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh children, if I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, because of its completion and explanations and declarations, I believe that I have fulfilled my promise to you to write this treatise, which is part of surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The operation of caesarean section has been prohibited in our region and time, until recently when the science of it was revealed, and its evidence is established; and there are only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been lost and have led to errors and uncertainty until the understanding of it has been established and its length and art extended.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I believe that I have fulfilled the order of this treatise in the second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of cauteries and other instruments of the work as it is for addition to the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	In ancient times, the reason why a skilled physician did not have to memorize all the parts of the body in detail was because the art of medicine was long and required practice in the science of anatomy, which Guall taught before understanding the significance of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and knowing the bones, nerves, and cartilages, their number, and their size; and the pulsating veins, quiet vessels, and their locations.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	For which reason, as Hippocrates said, it is not necessary to have a name for everything, but in the work, it is more important in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already mentioned that person in the introduction of this book; for those who do not know what we have said about anatomy, it is not surprising that they fall into error, as I have often seen many of them, because they are formed in this science and obtain their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	When a doctor saw a woman who had been bitten by an Echis scorpion on her neck, and it had pierced some arteries of the neck causing great blood flow into the woman that she died among them.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And another doctor saw that a man had been struck by a stone from another man's work, and the stone was large, and it came to him and passed through a third of his abdomen, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And he had already called for help to extract that, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, he knew under him where he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And another doctor took the wages of a duke from our land for surgery, and went to a skilled blacksmith who was near the fracture in his thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture, on the plate, with pulleys and levers of strong structure, and did not allow the plate air.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then remove the dressing according to his wishes, and remove the bandage, and remove the compress for several days and order that it be removed; and this should be done while the wound and the foot are healing, and reach a state of improvement.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And then you should apply it to him, and prepare to remove the bandage, and achieve peace and relieve his pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, if corruption was already confirmed in the member, so that it could not be restrained from that one, and did not cease to spread the corruption in the member until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And another doctor performed an incision on a pus-filled tumor, and it became ulcerated in a few days, until the great heat of the disease destroyed the patient.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of which is that the cranium is purged of melancholic humor, so that it does not reach the patient with iron from all over, but rather that it be in the member that suffers from all of it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	For that reason, my friends, it is necessary for you to divide the operation into two parts: one in which health is associated, and another in which it is performed in the best possible conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	I have already existed in all places of this book where the operation is performed, and error and fear occur; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against that and lay aside the one who causes these things, so that the people do not attribute them to you and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your weapons with solicitude and protection from God, and your patients with success and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way for the grace of God to lead to health and praiseworthy success, and lay aside the terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and keep your weapons from that which makes you fear, so that your position in your faith and in your name will not escape you: because more remains for your glory, and more later in the world and after your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	In some cases, it is necessary to perform dissection in certain areas:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat a bad patient badly, so that bad doctors will not remember you.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already dedicated this book to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The beginning of the division of the book, and the first part of the first section.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered by the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the handles of cautery, and of that which is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second section.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and puncturing, and on vents, and on plasters, and on the extraction of stones and similar things to those, all chapter and ordered by the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third section.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of torticollis and similar things to those; chapter ordered by the foot, and by the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of a pointed cautery and of sharp medicine and the remembrance of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that place begins the treatise on all the free.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	That you should know the quality of those handles of that cautery and of its tips, and in what manner it is forbidden to use it.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the speech about the quality of the handle of the cautery and its tip is a long and prolix, and subtle for the wise, and secretly hidden; and from there one has spoken much about secrets, and they have disagreed, and to me it seems a little like their speeches, I fear a long discussion.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that the cautery corresponds to all the universal composition, which is matter or its matter, except for two compositions, which are compositions of the tail and its matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the composition of the tail and dry matter, they disagree; because some said that the cautery is useful for that, and the others said the opposite of that, which is not convenient in disease that is by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not convenient that the disease tail and dry matter has that is burned and dried is healthy.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And tell that one who says the opposite of that, which is said to be very helpful in all cases where the tail and dry sweat are seen in the bodies of men, because when you compare the bodies of men with the moisture of them to the appearance of fire, it is easy to see the bodies of men.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the words of that one, which has experimented this thing to me sometimes in the past.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But perhaps not everyone can come over to that which has been extracted and exercised in the capital of cauteries by previous practice, and who has known the diversity of the appearance of men and the disposition of their diseases, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other appearances, do not be afraid of you, and especially in diseases that are moist and humid, because all doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree in the helpfulness of cauteries in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that the secret of healing by cauterizing with fire and its goodness is that it is simple, because the action of which only reaches the member that is cauterized and not the other member that is adjusted to it, only does a small harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the action of medicine come to that in the members which is of the same kind, and it often brings pain to the affected member, and it often causes difficulty in healing.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	May the fire, by its greatness and goodness of substance, not do that, but rather be superfluous. And we know this from experience and long study of the art over the truth of the causes; and for this you may be excused from the length of the sermon. And if not, it is not read to me in this pause, and the quality of the operation of which in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels evils, that is philosophical demonstration, which would be sharpened in your pains.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is appropriate to make cauteries and pause at the best time of primevera.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cauteries are appropriate at all times, because the harm from the time accident is submerged in the advantage of which is thrown, and more so if the cauteries are for pain or necessary pain, quickly and fiercely, which do not suffer delay because they fear those that come maliciously, which is greater than small harm coming from the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And do not catheterize in your feet, oh sons, that is only understood by the common people and foolish doctors, because that disease which is cured by cauterization is not always effective, and they stop that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not always present that they fear for that, because cauterization is only in a place of medicine which alters the appearance and dries out the moisture which is the cause of the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But nevertheless, cauterization is used excessively over medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his disease will return in some time of the day, according to the appearance of the patient and the location of his disease, and its virtue, and that which is prepared in the body of him from the aggregation of the excess in him, and that which is obtained to him in his acquisition in foods and similar causes; but the disease in which cauterization is administered is a subtle disease in a member of few excesses and moisture, such as a tooth cautery for pain and similar to that, it is possible that in him it will not return that pain, but that which is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And more commonly, the pointed cautery is the most effective method of medical treatment, and it is called correct treatment, not because I understand what they mean by that, but because they believe that there is no other cure that can be obtained through medicine or any other cause that would require a pointed cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and they understand that the pointed cautery is not always the most effective method of medical treatment, but only when administering methods of treatment in certain diseases, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause, they administer a pointed cautery, and it is effective for that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here, they understand that the pointed cautery is not always the most effective method of medical treatment, but they do not understand what I understand as common sense and too many of the foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that gold is better than iron for cauterization, and they did not say that except for the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place for cauterization does not matter, since it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen that there are those who say that it only works in certain people, and cauterization with gold is good and better than iron if you do it as they say; but however, when you make cauterization with fire made of gold, it is not up to you, since it is done according to the amount of gold you want for the hardness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive the heat; and if you adjust it over the fire, the gold melts in the fire, and some sheets are placed in the fire for the craftsman to use for that purpose.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for that, a pointed cautery is made with a lighter and more conveniently placed in the direction of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on the second chapter of the cautery, and have ordered those between the feet, so that the patient can ask what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for pain in the head due to cold and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization applies to the moisture and cold that cause this accident, which is the cause of many traumatic fluxes, called crisis, from the head to the parts of the hips and the arms, and many sleeplessness, and tooth pain and jaw pain, and generally all illnesses that occur due to cold, such as paralysis, drowsiness, and apoplexy, and similarities in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: first commands the patient to take a laxative medicine to empty his head, for three or four nights, according to the patient's strength and age and custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command the one who is shaving his head to do so with a razor, and place that shaved hair between your hands on a chair and place your hands over his chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the razor of your palm against the nose between his eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But remember, when you reach the location that you have indicated, mark that spot and then use the pointed cautery of olive oil, which is in this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that on the location that you have marked, with a movement that goes down, and make sure that it is not too tightly held at once, and you rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then slightly raise your hand and look at the location, and if you see that some of the bone has been exposed, as much as the amount of grain, then raise your hand, and if it does not return, place your hand on that iron, or another of those, if it is cold, before it is seen from the bone what I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve that on the location and leave that for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your hand on the side that is facing away from the fire and let that one be destroyed by the flame of the fire.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the four-herb ointment to the area until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that as soon as the plague is removed, the more the arm is bent, the better and more beneficial it is.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They say that one should cauterize the tendon at the bone, and hold the cautery until some part of the bone is attached to it.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove that which has been attached to the bone, and then apply the ointment.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	They say that one should apply the cautery to the back, until it reaches the bone strongly enough to break the bone, and this is the way to make a small incision:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate that from that area, the vapors of the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And one should keep the wound open for a long time, and then apply the ointment until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these two types of cauteries in all men, except in those who are second in line for fear; and let that one, if possible, be better for their health when it is; because the head is revealed by the solution of continuity of which we have testified in other members, and more so when the head of the patient is naturally free.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first type of cautery is safer and better for me; and from that one, I advise you to do the work for their health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the head there is chronic and long pain, and that is prolonged in the patient, and it uses gargles, and beaks, and capipurges, and ointments, and drugs, and candles, and wax, and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cauterizer that they have and do not know how to apply to it again from among those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not free and often there is a great deal of bleeding, then that cauterizer uses another cauterizer.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that above the horn of his head with a pointed cautery where the bone is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the bone and expose it from the skull in the amount that we have found and cauterize that with a pointed cautery on the back of his head in the place where the intestine is placed, — and that is the place where the cushion is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And place your hand in the wound, and do not expose the bone, because the patient will suffer great pain different from all other cauterizations of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say that this cautery is in this place, because it covers the point where the pointed cautery is applied to the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cauterization than that which is cauterized in the middle of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the ancient non-antiphlogistic cauterization.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the pain in the part of the head is very severe, or it extends to the back, then remove the medicines that make the head better, and administer the other cure, which I have said in the chapters on illnesses; and all this is not helpful, then cauterization in that place is done in two ways: either with a sharp-burning cautery, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May the pointed cautery be used as a medical instrument to hold an ointment jar, and apply it to that area and cover its extremities with bandages.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then incise the area of pain in the temple with a sharp knife that is inserted into the correct location behind it, and hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply pressure over the stopped area due to downward constriction, and leave it for three hours; and then remove the jar, and leave the plague for two or three days, and then place a bandage over the location where the wound is healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which has been inserted until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do that with some medical instruments which I have written about in the previous treatise on medical instruments.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cautery be made in this manner: ignite it with this form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a clover cautery, because its head has the form of a clover flower in which there is some curvature, and in the middle of it is a small point.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand on the location of the pain, and pull your hand back - so that the skin is not torn - and slowly move the small iron at speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of blood that is stuck due to the thickness of the needle is such that it covers the entire area, then lift your hand to prevent the artery from being torn, so that there is no bleeding.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a salted cloth to that location and place it there for three days; and then apply a heated, moist cloth and cure it until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cauterize the tip of the lancet according to the cautery, and avoid injury to the artery in this procedure.
Capitol quart.	Chapter fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cauterization of an ancient puncture.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure an ancient puncture with the remedy we have mentioned in the previous healing, and with the remedy we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and if you do not apply the healing, and see that the disease does not respond to the first cauterization with medicine or the cauterization with fire, then wait until the cauterization is white, because it means above the location of the pain a line of length equal to the thickness of the other; and place your hand firmly on that area and insert the needle until you reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is often bruised from chewing, and that the jaw not be adhered and the nerve that causes pain in that area, and that it does not become spasmed.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and care of the flow of sanctum from the artery that is embolized, in which there is fear and more so for those who do not know what to do and are not studious or experienced; and leave the operation in the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find the remembrance of the regimen for the flow of sanctum from the artery according to the same manner, in its own location in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this patient who does not benefit from this cautery and you see the body of the patient bearable, cauterize that in the middle location of the head as we have reported, and cure the wound before it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter of strangulation of the artery with two points, and this is the best cauterization and more conforming.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	About the cauterization of gout pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the big toe caused by cold humors and it is treated with the previous method, and the pain does not subside, then apply the cautery, and this is the one that has no point, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then apply the pointed cautery close to the fire, and bring it around the entire big toe as if it were a wheel, or in the circle of each one if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along the edge of the big toe, gradually push the cautery a little at a time until you feel that the area is hot enough.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the pointed cautery touches the entire big toe, and it feels like that, and then cure the areas before they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter Six
De cauterizacio de turtura.	About the cauterization of torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture that is cured and is not treated with cauterization except for the specific ones that come from flexion, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the affected area due to dryness or spasms of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that area of torture with jerks and capillary and gastrointestinal remedies, and do not compare your treatment, then it is recommended to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first from the golden needle, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cauterizing instrument in the opposite part of the affected area, as softening only occurs in the healthy part.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The form of cauterization is that you cauterize that part with the cauterizing instrument at the right side of the golden needle, a little above the crown of the head, and in the temple, the longest one should be twice as long as the previous one, and place your hand over the cauterizing instrument until the required amount of the affected area is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cauterizing instrument, and it is called a lancet, which has a specific shape.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	May it however be more subtle to have one less than usual; and cover the area with a cloth to prevent excessive greasiness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the area with that which is given for the process until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and is treated with that which we have said, and does not compare your medication and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize that area with four cautery: over all the corners of his head; and with a cautery and the middle part of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the back.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is made according to what is mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and then cure with that which processes.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of the cauterization of forgetfulness caused by a stroke.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Given great amounts of grains and large pills to the patient at the beginning.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then remove the cap from the patient's head and place your hand on their chest, placing the described ointment from this treatise on it.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then wait for some time, as that is the way of using the cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Do that again according to the method that has already been mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if those methods are successful; and if not, then make three points on the back part of their head, which should be placed between the most elevated part of the head and the nape of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Wait for the longest time between each point, and then carefully cure the burned area.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you are more skilled and the patient can tolerate it, then make the point in the middle; and if you are less skilled, then make the point on both heels.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then cure it before it is healed; and if the point is made with oil, do so according to the form given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On cauterization of the perineum and softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	You proceed as described in the softening of the head and that which we have said; and then shave the patient's head, and then apply the cautery at the middle point of the head, and apply the cautery to all the bones of the head, and apply it to the back part of it, and three cautery points on the spines of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the case of softening of the body for three cautery points and the patient can bear them, and the condition is strong, then apply the cautery at four points on the spines of the back, and afterwards apply the cautery into the neck where the collarbone of the patient is, and raise the hand from there.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then care for that which has been healed, and this cautery should be made with olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is caused by flatulence.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, modify the patient's brain at the beginning of the treatment with years and the other cure which we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer ginger and mustard to the servant who is modifying, giving it for several days, good nutrition of the foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the back of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the occiput of the patient, and over each hair of the head, cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates, then cauterize that with cautery which I have said, having paralysis and softness of the body over the spine of the neck and the spine of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And if it is a cautery with oil, follow what has been said before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then pause the subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and thin, and have become thick and heavy, then cautery is applied to those parts which we have called "the ones that have paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and tends towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give them that which cleanses their brain according to the same thing that has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and make a proper incision on the top of their head over the circle, and place a dressing on that spot.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be kept lying down throughout.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then place a liniment; and it is worthy of ancient sheep's tallow.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And apply that over the fire for heating, prepared according to measure, which the patient says relieves them when it is in them.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then apply that in the middle of their head over the circle, and let it be rubbed into them until it is absorbed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And give the patient this medicine every week for a whole week, following the other regimen until they are healed; or if you want, make small points with a pointed cautery according to the most of them, but always hold your hand on their chest with a cauterized hand: this is a special kind of cauterizer that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And place your hand on that swollen part in butter or in grayish wax.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of the application of hot water descending on the back.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared to you that the beginning of hot water on the back by the symptoms that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient that water which melts the head of them, and keep that one from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command the patient to shake their head, and make small points with that cautery in the middle of the head; and then make small points with two cauterizers on two temples if it is the beginning of hot water in two backs, or on one side if it is the beginning of hot water in one back.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incise all the veins and tendons that are behind the cord; and place the cauteries in that long, on the side of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And watch out for blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow from there, stop the bleeding with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you should also have knowledge of the skill that is in the extraction of tendons and the treatment of those abscesses and caution about blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some veins are cauterized in the neck behind two bones and with two cauteries produced recently.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears from the eyes are very old and through the veins and arteries that are in the place manifest of the head and it is verified that this is excessive and flexible, then cauterize that one with the cauteries that we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water cazent in the eyes, and with the cauteries in the middle of the head and with two cauteries in the neck behind two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck behind two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If necessary for addiction, then cauterize that on the entire length of the shoulder blade above the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of cauterization of bad breath from the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that person who has been mentioned in the division and have not yet completed your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient three drops of oil; and then remove the cap from it, and cauterize with a small cautery or an olive oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a small cautery or two cauteries on the two upper eyelids under the eyebrows.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the small cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of cauterization for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a small cautery or this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, make points on the two superciliary arches with a small cautery in each part, and lengthen them from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the superciliary arch.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand too close to the cautery, but according to the amount that the tense part of the eyelid is stuck.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	About the cautery of the eyelid when the eyelashes are converted into the parts inside and out.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the eyelashes of the eyelid are converted into the parts inside and out, if you press the eyelid, make points in those places according to two methods, either with fire or with medical cauterization that burns.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you use fire for cauterization, command the patient to look at those eyelashes that are like those that clean them, while they are prolonged and equal; and if you press that which is their own, then strengthen the eyelids of that one with a bandage so that it does not open until the eyelashes have grown.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore, when they are born and grown, pause the patient's head on your shoulder, and then place your hand over their eyelid, using a second hand in the shape of a half-moon, and the beginning of this method is near their ears.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place a soft cloth or moistened cotton on their eyelid.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then remove the pointed cautery that is this shape of it.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize the shape that was placed, little by little, in a zigzag pattern, until the surface of the eyelid is burned, which is like a half-moon, appearing properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And to ensure the healing of the eye work, it is that you lift the eyelid which has already been contracted and the ears of the patient should be elevated for the puncture of the eyelid.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place it over the cloth until the wound is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And if necessary, cure that wound before it becomes infected.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the eyelid returns to its place and becomes softened, then make another incision with the cautery over that area as you did before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the eyelashes are in the eyelid, then cauterize that area while it is raised to its natural position and equalized so that the eyelashes do not push against each other.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery should be applied in such a way that the patient is commanded to pull the eyelashes while they are extended and equalized, and then a piece of cloth or cloth should be made into the shape of a fan to cool it.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take a piece of soft cloth and a live coal, and if that is not available, and mix those causes with water, and make it into a poultice so that it is not scattered; and spread that over the cloth that was made into the shape of a fan, and place that on one eye while the other is covered with a soft cloth; and then place the head of the patient in a comfortable position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Pause the medicine over the wound and press it gently but not too hard so that the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, which is like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so, if the burning sensation continues, remove the medicine and press it gently on the wound; when the burning sensation ceases, remove the medicine and wash the wound with clean water; then consider whether the eyelid has been lifted as it was when it was washed due to a cut or incision, for that is good; and if not, return to the medicine on the area where the medicine has not been applied and does not discolor before your operation is completed and it is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then press over the wound with a clean cloth until the pus of the abscess is drained, and then treat it with an ointment or another remedy until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And you must guard your operation that you keep clean diligence in the wound so that the medicine does not fall out, and if the eyelid becomes soft and some cause of the hairs in the wound, then repeat your medicine on that area where the eyelid is soft, and usually as it was done at the beginning, and do so until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the method of treating gout.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the bones of men are varied according to their size and shape, and therefore your contraction should be made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not obstruct the correct path to the one who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal bone of the bone.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with this method that we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, do not compare your treatment, then cover your head with a cloth in your hand, and hold the head of the patient between your hands in such a way that it is not too tight or agitated.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a cotton swab soaked in alcohol or mucilage of poppy on the bone of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cauterizer of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be curved, like a cane or a pen knife, from one end of which the cauterizer is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see it entering the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to draw it out with a tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But it is better to leave that which is concave as it is, or work on the other side.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And if the fistula is open, press it and insert clean and dry material into it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place your hand over the area where the cautery is burning hot, and hold it away from the patient's face and nose, so that your hand or the patient is not burned, and then remove the cautery from the gray matter and corrupt that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of the treatment, the cautery goes into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and leave that there for three days, and then place your hand over that area and apply dry material around it until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If they have been ill for several days and have not recovered, then pause over the sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and then scrape it according to what is suitable in its own chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterizing fistulas that the first said: enter the location of the fistula and make a hole in that place; then place your hand over that fissure, which has the form of the lead; and put in that amount of one ounce of lead; and with your hand hold it well for retention, so that the lead does not reach the edge of that place; and cover that edge of the wound with album of egg or water, where the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by marvelous cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed by the method we have said of cauterization and cure, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a nostrum and reduce the fistula to the body of the nostrum when it comes to its own location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cautery of the wound in the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Vesicles or blisters often occur on the lips, and especially on the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those wounds with the method we have mentioned in the divisions and do not apply your cure, then apply the small cautery as follows:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And place it according to the thinness of the spoon.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place your finger gently in those wounds until the cautery reaches the bottom of the wounds.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the healing ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery of fistulas in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the uvula or on the palate or on the teeth, an abscess occurs and a swelling forms, and it is broken, and it becomes chronic, and pus forms and a fistula is formed, and you do not apply your cure, then apply the cautery according to the amount that has been discharged from the fistula, and place that ignited in the opening of the fistula, and then your hand inside until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the back of it make a blister or two; and then apply the healing ointment that we have mentioned for the cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	If the wound is healed and cured, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and treat the corrupted bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	About the use of cautery for teeth and the softening of the jaws.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the jaws are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and these diseases are not cured by medicines, place the patient's head on your knee, and hold the cautery in the shape that will be used, without you placing the quill over the tooth and inserting it into the area where the cautery is applied fiercely, and keep the patient away from the heat of the fire until the temperature of the tooth reaches the point where the pain is felt.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should close their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and this can be done because the decayed tooth is closed, the softened jaw is strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of the cauterization of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or if there is frost or worms in it, and the treatment does not relieve the pain, then cauterization can be done in two ways: with a cautery made of cow's horn, or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	With a cautery made of cow's horn, you take the horn and blow into it until it is hot, then wrap it in cloth and place it over the end of the tent, and quickly push the heated cautery into the tooth that hurts.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat this several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the horn above, and place that over the painful tooth, and place the heated iron on top of it until the iron reaches the root of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But the cauterization with fire is that you wait for the proper time of day or night, and if there is any discomfort in it, and the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then approach the cautery in the shape it will come, and place that on the tooth and your hand inside to ensure the cautery is not broken; and do this several times so that the pain remains or on that day or on the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And cover that the patient opens their mouth with good border and holds it for an hour, then remove it; this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as much as you can on the part that you want to extend according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cauterization of protrusions.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When protrusions are caused by cold humors that infiltrate and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you want to gently push them back, then approach the cautery with the shape of which is this following, having two ends prepared so that the smoke from the cautery can pass through the other end, and place that ignited on that abscess several times, and another if necessary, until it reaches the top of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, then pause the cauterizer according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it for three days, and then place it over the wound filled with boiled water until it has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that wound with an ointment and bandages until it has healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the needle or cauterizer is as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization of warts and of the construction of a blister.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes onto the surface of the lung, and especially when it is cold and humid, then at the beginning of treatment, give the patient laxatives, and then cauterize that part of the lung where the moisture is located.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to touch the cauterizer to the lung or not to burn the lining of the lung, but a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that part with another cauterizer at the joint of the neck in the lower spine of the lung.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the pointed cautery should be inserted in the same way as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then care for that wound which was previously inserted before it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cautery of a patient's lungs and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, and the patient does not have fever or tisic, and it is an old wound, then cauterize that wound with two pointed cautery over the breastbone in the places where the lungs are located; and another pointed cautery in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and let the pointed cautery be inserted in the same way as before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, your cautery should be made with the pointed cautery called puncta, the form of which was described in the punctation of heels.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let your points enter those; and then care for that wound which was previously inserted before it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cautery should have three points for the operation, as follows: first, you can make three cauteries in this form.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	About the cautery of the nipple, which is a help.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humors and does not stop at its return time, you should return its dislocation before it returns to that place, and with a small movement, move it as necessary, as we have testified, so that first reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient over on their back or on their side; and then raise the cushion which is in the part of the nipple to the parts above the mentioned parts of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the parts below.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then extinguish the cautery which has two points; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the cushion until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will be as follows, now of four cauterizations.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it should be done according to the amount of tension; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Some are adjusted according to this count, and for what reason they are the cautery of eight.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place your hand on the cautery for a while to apply salt, and then make the patient comfortable and not suffer for some time until they are relieved.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is at the joints above and below, then do this: apply the cautery over the muscle with a clavilh or pointed cautery, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of the cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is cold and moisture in the stomach before that extra part of its complexity and multiplied many times to it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment and do not confirm, then cover the patient's face and extend his hands and his things, and then apply the cautery with three cautery: one cautery on the chest for the amount of one pointed cautery, and two cautery on the back of the cautery, until the figure of cauteri triangulada; and lengthen between those that are not adjusted that will cause pain.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of the cautery is equal to the thickness of the two thickest parts of the pork's neck.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if the shape of the cautery is according to this form, then add it. And if you want, burn with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cautery in the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach is burned at the point where this cautery frightens it: and you should hold the pointed cautery over the stomach according to the quantity that you want to test, and then burn those points with this cautery; and after that, apply the appropriate treatment before it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the burning of the hernia.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain occurs in the hernia due to coldness or humidity or thick wind before its normal composition is restored by excessive egress, and the patient is cured with the treatment we have mentioned and not otherwise, then the patient should be laid flat on their back, and three pointed cautery according to this form and this quantity should be applied over the hernia below the ribs, where a man lies down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery should be according to the width of the said device, and the cautery should be according to the length of the body's diameter.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Do not understand the meaning of the word "cauteri" in this context.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that is attached to the quantity of the main part of the codex is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet, then he should be seated, who has already extended his limbs, and raised his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to use these cauteries with a pointed cautery, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the main part of the codex be attached so that the whole body is attached and reaches inside the intestines, as the codex here is subtle; and know that.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of puncturing an abscess on the foot with a pointed cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When the inflammation or abscess in the foot is painful and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient feels increased gravity and pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the foot, then the pain is often very intense and has exhausted the doctors with treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be placed on their side; and then carefully examine the location of the abscess; and then ignite the cautery that is shaped like a needle, the shape of which has been described on the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And then cauterize it with that and the cautery until all the tissue is charred, until it reaches the bone, until it exits.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cautery except for that which is prolonged in the art of medicine, and in which most patients have known to be beneficial; but this one has been tried for some time on this operation, nevertheless it is better to leave it to those who know, and it is more effective.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of gout.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauteries of the bones of astrology to gout were made in this way, and this is the one you should take from the long dry bone that is found, and it should be of the largest size.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and place it in the fire, and then cauterize at that location where the scapula is connected to the collarbone; and with two small cauteries on either side, one slightly declining towards the part where the beard was left, and two small cauteries between the fifth rib and the ribs, declining slightly towards the back; and another cauteri in the middle of the chest; and three small cauteries on the back; and another cauteri in that location where the scapula is connected to the collarbone; and two small cauteries on the sides of the chest, after the cauteri between the scapulas.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not let your hand touch the pointed cautery, but rather keep it away from the edge of the wound.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they also said that ancient healers knew of men who used a pointed iron tool similar to a needle and ignited it, and then placed it at the location between the ribs, until they reached the abscess and pierced it, as we have mentioned in the abscess of the throat.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	However, in this piercing with the pointed cautery, there is no need for fear, as it has not happened yet in the location of the fistula that cannot be healed.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery of the mouth.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating the illness of the mouth, do not compare your treatment with what has been said about the cure in the division, but rather use the following three methods for the cautery, all of which are correct, one of which is to make three or four points along the length of the mouth according to the shape of the cauteries of the throat, whose figure has been given earlier.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And each cautery should have the largest part of a rod or a bit more, and the handle of the cautery should be the handle that we have said in the cautery of the foot equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not place your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to cauterize, which is that you ignite the cautery with two flames, the one that we have said in the capital of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the vein that is at the end of the thigh on the left side of the patient.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be the one that lifts the vein according to the length of the body, so that the points can be made at the same latitude.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert both flames, light one, in the moment that those penetrate the vein of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus four points are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with the cautery having three flames.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you should cure the pointed cautery for at least three days, as it is more beneficial than the other previous causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31:
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	About the cauterization of hydrocephalus.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Do not make points in hydrocephalus, but rather in a specific place.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydrocephalus, follow the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment to others, but rather make four points around the navel, one point on the stomach, another on the chest, another on the back, two points between the spine, one on the right side of the chest, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the point should be according to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And leave the point in place for a long time to prevent pain from lasting too long.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not remove the patient from treatment immediately after the point is placed, as it is beneficial for them to stay there and recover quickly.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the pointed cautery used to cauterize the abdomen is similar to that of the one mentioned above, and the shape of the one used to cauterize the back is according to its own form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter thirty-two.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cauterization of feet and cushions.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with hydrocele and filled with water sodium, cover them with a cautery on the back of the foot in no contact with that which is between the ear and the ring, and raise your hand over the cautery and do not twist it; then raise your hand and do not return to that, because the water sodium will drain.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	And the cautery of this form is as follows: And then make two cushions, and in each cushion make a cautery at the end of the cautery cutaneously.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery of the length of the cushion: and the one at the bottom and the other at the middle of the cushion; and over each cushion two cushions.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Let the wound be open for a long time to allow some water to drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat those causes that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter thirty-three.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of the cauterization of wounds in the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When wounds in the abdomen are caused by cold and humidity that enter through the pores, the digestive and retentive virtues are lost, which are in the stomach and intestines, and they are cured with these methods of treatment and not with cauterization, and sometimes the patient suffers from a powerful cauterization exhibited in the cauterization of the stomach, then cauterize it with a large cauterizing iron according to what was previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauterizing circle and with four cauterizing needles in the delicate circumference of the abdomen, with the subtle cauterizing needle; and with the cauterizing needle on the abdominal wall over large wounds, or with two cauterizing needles.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the excessive humidity and the patient is able to tolerate it, then cauterize it on the lower abdomen and intestines, and strongly adjust two cauterizing needles on the stomach and near the groin, which will cure the condition perfectly.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of ancient hernias.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When in nature ancient hernias or one of thick humors that infiltrate or corrupted moisture, and they are cured by the method we have mentioned in the division and do not compare it with other treatments, then cauterize with three cauteries on the small of the back, and with a cauterizing iron above the belly through two incisions.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it is found that the stomach of the patient is infiltrated and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is puffed up, then cauterize that above the stomach with a large cauterizing iron according to what has been previously mentioned; and with one cauterizing iron on the chest, and with another cauterizing iron on the abdomen of the patient with a clavilh, and leave the cauterizing iron for some time under, and cure the patient before it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of the cauterization of the arteries, approach their incisions.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you incise the artery, then light the cautery that is shaped like a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Approach that lit cautery to the incised artery and insert it through the opening until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make a few or two, if the arteries are too many, then cauterize each one after you have returned, and care for those that you apply to them from the mouth until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize a large cautery on anything, it is more harmful than useful.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in nature between their parts.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, then heal with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When someone has an abscess in the natural world, and it is old, drain the pus from it and remove the corrupted humidity, and then apply a subtle probe to that area, and approximate the amount of its depth with the front-pointing probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then use a pointed cautery that resembles a needle.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that lit cautery into this abscess, according to the amount in which the probe enters.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat this process with the cautery entering until those corrupted parts are burned in a few minutes or several, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn nerves and veins; or if the abscess is in the body of the bladder or intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not do this unless the abscess is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that place until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and the matter has been removed from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not left in place, then it is known that they penetrate into the bones and corrupt them, or that is the cause of those conditions from which they will remembered in their location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain occurs in warts due to friction or heavy pressure, and the patient's breath is blocked, then it is recommended that you cauterize each wart with a small cautery, where the remembrance of the cause should be remembered.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And if you cauterize too much, then do so with a small distance, so that three cautery lines will come out, and they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder is weakened and softened due to friction and moisture, so that the patient cannot hold urine, then cauterize that area a little further away from the bladder, as soon as the pain begins in the penis, and cauterize with one cautery in the middle, and another on the opposite side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the thickness of the foot; and cauterize that pointed cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And use the clavihus according to what is appropriate.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cauterization of the marrow.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is injury and wetness in the marrow, and because of this compression is prohibited, and the mesenteries of it are corrupted, and its provocation is delayed, and due to this, pain occurs from them, then it is necessary that this place be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a pointed cautery over the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be a clavihus.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When the ligaments that are infiltrated at the part of the elbow, and that cause the inflammation of its place, and because of this, the cushion is lengthened over the other when they are compared to each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the dislocation is often in the area where it hurts.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should cauterize the patient with a pointed instrument similar to a cautery, as you have previously tested in the circumference of the wound, and so that the wound falls into the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery should have the same shape as the one used in stomach cauterization.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not available to you, then use three pointed instruments like an olive branch.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the cautery should be made according to the thickness of the entire chain; and then cure it when it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	About the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the wound area, and its cause is cold and moisture, the patient is cured with the remedy we have mentioned and not with the one that is ancient, and this is because it is heavy with gross humors such as fetid or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the handle of the cautery in that case has two types: the medical cauteries with burning coals, or the fire cauteries.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	And the second type of cautery is known as one that cauterizes that over the part of the ankle, with three triangular-shaped cautery tools in this form; and do those well deep.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery is the amount of the diameter of the tool, whether it is an olive or a large one.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes the cautery is placed on the middle of the leg over the knee, because there are four cautery tools.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize the circle of which the form is preceded in the cautery treatment of the dislocation of the ankle, and that circle contains and burns the entire tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery in such cases when pain is adhered to the ankle and does not extend into the space.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it extends into the space, then cauterize that over the space on the location where the patient is, and with one cautery on the calf for a few of those called the lateral part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the pointed cautery, and the depth of the cautery according to the thickness of the nail.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient complains that the pain extends to the area where the foot is located, then cautery those points here with three or four or more points as needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient complains that the pain is on the back of the knee, then cautery those points here with a pointed cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cautery that the pointed cautery does not burn the nerves or great sinew, and that for that reason it is not suitable for use on the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have also seen another of those who cautery on the scalp and burn in the cautery until the tumor is achieved, and the bed is inflamed inside that the foot is corrupted.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then apply that death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts together, then cautery each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise men said in the cauterization of any cautery, this is the manner: make it similar to a circle of iron, the circumference of which should be the length of one palm; and its thickness should be according to the size of a finger bone or a little more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And they said that this circle should be one third; and the space between them should be the thickness of a finger joint; and those circles should be placed in two parts; and the length of those iron strips should be a finger or two fingers, and make them properly covered in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then it should be heated in the fire until it curls and produces sparks, and then it should be placed on the part of the patient, the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that point with three cautery needles in one motion.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; and apply a poultice to that point and leave the dressing covered for several days; and then care for that wound until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Translation: Oh sons, of this kind of cautery we have not used much because of the fear of its effect on him, and because of some things we have found that affect him.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Translation: The places where he suffers from burns, and the one that is near him.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Translation: The places where he suffers from burns, and the one that is near him, you should make two circles with a tube without a hole in it, such as the one used for guaiacum; its length should be equal to the width of their body, and its ends should be like nuts or hooks.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	Translation: And if the space between his thighs is greater than the width of the cautery, then place it below and above, and make sure that it contains between them in this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Translation: And then place your hand on the part of the body where the patient lies, and cover it with your hand; then take water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be like a small fire, and you should do that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient to bite and adhere to him — because that biting is like that of fire — until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and remove all the water from the tail of the snake with water that is not boiling.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave it for three days and pause over that border until the black of the abscess remains, and leave it for several days, and run from there; this is the last remedy.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it with ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the thigh or leg, make it in the state that contains water as it is made in the water equally.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of boiling water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and unextinguished fire from the ashes of one part, and draw it out and pause in a new boil of which the part left behind is perforated by a small tube according to the amount that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And pause behind the bottom of the boil in another boiling water, and pour over that alkali and live fire from hot water that takes those by a certain amount, and put it on those with a good compression, and leave the boil that comes out of the ashes into the boiling water.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all of that water, and pour it over another living cause and another renewed alkali, because that water is very strong, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, because that operation is like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And there are some medicines that are cauterized widely, such as thyme and myrrh and other causes that are mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Galen reported from an ancient man the operation and cure of which is cured pain in the water and sciatica vein, and magnifies that it is of that, and says that there is no need for other cure, because it is healed by a method such as recommendation, because that one enters into bath and has already known of that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be near a certain green herb, and if there is no green herb, then take fresh fig; and the mot should be crushed with a few grays and placed on the water in which the pain is, or in the cushion, or in the bed, and tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it rest for the amount of three hours or until the patient has enough of the sweating.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put that in the bath and when the patient's body is wrapped, enter that into the ground, where the pain ceases and it is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that no one should use this cautery with these remedies, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	It is said that when the goat's wound is made, the vein is cauterized, it is improved for him; and this cautery is done in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toe of the foot and between the heel.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat's wound and apply it to that with fire until it is charred; and place it on the wool and leave it until it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat that, and do not stop doing that until the sensation of the bite reaches the whole body and the pain stops.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the cattle cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the cautery for two painful joints.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes the pain in the two joints is caused by various reasons, such as injury or impact or excessive excretion, and by causes similar to those, by the infusion of moist and wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery does not cure in this single species, which is made for the infusion of moist matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, after the patient's excretion of bad matter and similar to them, which are made on the two joints in which the pain is three lines wide, more than that, according to the amount of tolerance of the patient and the virtue of it.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And this cautery is made with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cautery is made with three or four pointed cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of cautery at the onset of gout.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Wounds occur in children with this disease; and it is said that they happen on their structure in the morning, elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And usually in the lower lumbar vertebrae of the back and at night overshadowing the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to prevent it, then use the pointed cautery that is circular according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	which grips the cautery over all part of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cautery around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And make the points close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then cure the area before it is healed by what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Remember that cautery should not be administered in gout that is caused by spasm of the nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And since gout is cured by the method of treatment and the pain does not subside, then use cauterization again.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you should cauterize that area near the joint of the foot with a pointed cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is a cauterization, use this type of cautery:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain spreads to other joints or to other parts of the body, and it is not improving, then cauterize each one with three or four points on each side of the body using this cautery olive branch.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If you need to use a pointed cautery that is not yours, then use it on the affected area, do not press your hand too close to the cautery before, only around the site of the injury.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain can enter the bone and both, then administer the cautery that we mentioned in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the hands and it is called gout, then prick in the circle of the finger bones as they revolve, prick in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the said places, then prick in the circle of the finger bones on each nail and on the tip of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain can approach other joints or muscles, then cauterize all the parts of the helpers.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient from good regimen and reception of medicines, because if good regimen is done and flatulence is evacuated, this cautery will heal, God help us.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the cauterization of wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the wound is in the joints and the intestines are protruding from under the skin, and this begins to happen, then tell the patient to loosen their clothing on that day and use mild laxatives so that the opening in their abdomen does not become larger.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient between your hands on their side, and tell them to hold their breath while the hole is being made or the intestines appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return the intestine to its place, and try to repair the rupture on the side of the pelvis without moving the end of it, which should resemble a circle at the bottom of the abdomen.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then use the cautery in this form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	while holding it with a pair of tongs and burning incisions.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place your hand with the cautery over that spot, and enter through that opening to reach the bones of the pentenilh at the middle of the duiduni; and repeat that other method if you have not succeeded in the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe the position of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn that intestine because it does not come out from under the patient without causing death or other great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you have the cautery, do not touch the bones, and do not complete your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And be aware that the cautery for children should be thin according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then care for the location of the cautery for three days until the wound is healed over the edge of the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure those other wounds before they become infected.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should lie on their back for four days until the wound is sealed and the infection has passed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And make sure that the nourishment given to them is according to the length of time of their treatment, which should be given through their stomach, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to get up after four days, then administer appropriate medication, and keep that for another four days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And they should be well rested and replenished with food and drink, and of strong will, because when they follow this regimen for healing, the entire body will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you should direct the healing of the other ruptures in the other parts of the body, and at the beginning, and so that they do not recur, then cauterize the rupture with a pointed cautery according to the amount of it, and that which is extracted from the coda is like the clean part of it; and then cure that wound which we have said, and it should not be adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And then the first doctor said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular pointed cautery, rather than with a needle.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And then a line is placed over the wider part of the rupture, and another line above it; and your hand holds a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is more slender and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of the cauterization of tortion.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When the limbs are deformed due to injury or impact, and persistent pain persists for a long time and does not improve with medical treatment, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery for each member should be according to its size, patience, and effectiveness, as well as the location of the tortion and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed with the first cautery, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery over it; because according to the custom of those pains, they are points in the member that approach the bone, so that you can achieve those cauteries within the patient's body before the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cautery for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leprous people are burned with a cautery for great relief, and if the type of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of flaccidity and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, when you want to cauterize that one, consider whether the leprosy is common and that at that cure, and do not say this, and be careful over the patient that the corruption comprehends all of his body and all of his appearance, then cauterize that one on the head: with one in the middle of the head, and with the second behind him, with the forehead to the end of the hair; and the others on two ears; and another behind, on the nape or back.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, your hand on the cautery a little inside where there is a small pressure on the bone, and from there the scales are displaced, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated from it; and cauterize on the melon according to what is prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then use the cauteries we have mentioned in the previous chapter; apply a cautery to the tip of the nose, two cautery needles on both ears, two cautery needles on two spine bones of the neck, two cautery needles on the spine bones of the back, one large cautery near the collarbone, one over the shoulder, two over the elbows, one over each elbow, two over the shoulders, two over the muscles, and two on the tendons of the patient's hand; cauterize all the joints mentioned in the previous chapter, both on the hands and feet, and on each toe of their feet, and on the bones of their hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful not to burn those nerves that are above the ankle.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some of these wounds are cauterized with a cautery on the bones of the stomach and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the pharynx.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and you know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as with the other parts, because their body has already been stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And you know that the cautery should be of appropriate size according to the members and joints, as indicated by the tools of the specialties.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the cautery with flour mixed with honey and the other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cautery of stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then you should cautery that numb member with a cautery appropriate to the size of the member or its part.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the tip of the cautery enter slightly into the skin.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it with the medicine until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some wounds are cauterized with a certain substance that causes wonder to the muscles and feet, and the spine of the back and the flesh of the nerves that move that member, and it remains a wonder.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not use any other substance but that which is known in the anatomy of members and the exit of all the nerves that move the whole body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the cauterization of barbs that are curved.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When barbs are too long and do not conform to any of the ingredients of medicine, then cauterize on that one with a pointed cautery according to the quantity of the species of the codex until it remains white and the color of it is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that flour of errors and of lentils with olive oil and with leaves of arnagle, and with the sap of columbine or with the sap of iris, each one is a part and all are mixed, and then let it be linen and place it on the location where it is placed until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of the cauterization of the neck.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and one wants to remove it, then cauterize that circular cautery around it as it is turned.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the back cautery in the middle; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it will become an ulcer, and I have already seen this some time ago.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to be cauterized around it with a circular cautery as we have said, or with a pointed cautery.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 10.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of the cauterization of the abdomen.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some abdomen is delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess or the state of the patient, who is old and weak, or due to time, and you want to accelerate the maturation of the abdomen; then cauterize around it with a small pointed cautery; and afterwards apply a plaster that will accelerate its maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to make the perforation with the pointed cautery, then place it in the following form: and pause it at the middle location of the foot, where it should penetrate the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is placed in that location which is too far, so that the arm of the patient is injured; and then care should be taken to ensure it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of cauterization with a corroding agent.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A corrosive substance is a corrupting agent that moves within the body, which corrodes whatever it comes into contact with, like fire eating dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see that corrosive in the location where the cautery of fire has been made, then place small and large claws according to what is suitable in the location where the corrosive is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize all parts until you have removed all the corrosion and there is no cause left of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let it rest for three days, and place olive oil mixed with salt on the cauterized locations until all the scabs have been completely removed and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then carefully remove that burning flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	However, if after three days the flesh has grown healthy where there is no corruption, then it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that which remains in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And apply some sharp medicine to that area, which is similar to a cauterizer.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, a pointed cautery of fire is not as effective in burning off the pus.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already told you the cure for that area with sharp medicine in the division, and take that which will be needed for the duration.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cautery of claws and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Claws are often found in the parts of the foot that are affected by the disease called claw, which is a great cause of pain; and cautery is done in those areas in two ways, either with fire or with a pointed cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	However, cautery with fire is done by igniting the pointed cautery similar to a spike, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that contains the claw in each part, and it should be of sharp edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that fire on the knuckle, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the knuckle until the cautery reaches the depth of the knuckle.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it for three days until it begins to swell.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply that with wild marsh-mallow leaves mixed with salt, and leave the poultice on it for a day until it is completely removed from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the wound with fresh meat juice until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and there are wounds in the surface of the body, especially on the thighs and feet, then you should administer in those cauteries with water, and take a syringe of iron or of wood or of pen of lead, and place that over the knuckle; and then slowly inject a small amount of water through the syringe into the marrow of the knuckle, and turn your hand, and rotate that with compression of your hand from all sides, and press the margin of the syringe on the root of the knuckle, and find the water in the tip of the root of the knuckle; and wait for the patient an hour for the bite of the water to take effect, and then remove it, because the knuckle has its roots removed.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And they did that to all of them, bringing them into the room where they were in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And they took care of those who had broken teeth by removing the remains of the teeth that the flesh was growing into.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of the cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When a person has trembling caused by injury to the nerves or by fever due to some cause, or by another similar cause, it is customarily advised that you cauterize them with four cautery irons or with one on each spine of the back, between each spine there is one cautery; and on their chest, and over their stomach, use an olive oil cauterizer.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of the patient subsides and the healing of the injury is accelerated.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of the cautery for accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are wounds in the body that have been caused by sharp objects and have become infected with pus, it is customarily advised to cauterize over the entire head of the boil with a thin cautery made of myrtle wood, the end of which is held in the fire; or with a long instrument of erestology; or with a lenticular cauterizer.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some people cauterize the area around the beginning of the expulsion according to this method; and they do not believe in it, and those who perform it disrupt the excess and heal from it.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is better to do this before the evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 66.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cauterization of fluxes of hernias by incision of the arc.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	People who have flux from hernias that are incised because of the pressure, or from the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar cases, and it is difficult to remain in that state.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when something happens to anyone, you should always place your hand on the opening of the hernia, and place your palm over that area until it is closed and the flux of the hernia does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place the burning oil of small and large olives, by many names, and blow on them until they are extinguished.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then approach the second location and place the cautery on the area where the artery is broken, over that vein quickly so that it will not bleed again, and insert the cautery until it is sealed and restricted that wound.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the wound is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove the cautery and extend it, then take another cautery constantly from the cautery that are prepared in the fire, and do not cease to do so until the wound is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and that it does not come over the patient or any other misfortune.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when the blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the wound in those places, and especially when the artery is large, there are four methods: either by using a cautery as mentioned above, or by extracting it when it is not extracted, because when the extremities of it are burned and the wound is restricted, or it should be tied with a strong thread or bandage for its firm structure, or it should be placed on medicines that have the virtue of restricting the wound; and they should be strengthened by a cushion or constraint of decent structure.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May the one who administers a decent restriction of the patient's clothing and the patient's stricture with bandages or due to the position of causes and similar, does not compare but burns.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If that happens to anyone and it is not the doctor present or medicine, then begin with a pause of the indicated remedy on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand at the great constriction of the patient until the swelling of the infected part of the plague is not remained; and above the arkeria it should not remain; and above the arkeria it should be sprinkled with cold water of great coolness until it is congealed and swollen; and more cover in which there is a need for cauterization or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and punctures and of bleeding and of wounds and of their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that all illness in which cauterization with fire or medicine is necessary, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and the forms of the cauteries; and we have ordered the chapters of the sub-heading of the chapter from the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	I will proceed in this chapter for such a purpose, so that the one who desires it may be helped by that, regarding what he has asked about.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Since I will begin that, child, know that in this chapter it is for the purpose of frightening what is in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	Because for that child who is in great caution, during the operation which is in this chapter moved evacuations the one which is with the blood that is in the life of the aspiration of the vein or incision on the abscess or extraction of the exudation or purification of the plague or extraction of the splinter and its likes.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And of all those accompanied by fear and trembling and in the most of them death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that such a thing does not fall upon you in which there is doubt, because some evacuations are from the hands of men who are from diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them there is some that you will go to their disease and it is from death, and they suffer because of the violence of that which they find of their disease, and because of the length of the disease of the other, and of the disease is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those who give you such advice, you should trust them and follow their instructions, as their knowledge is beneficial and their ignorance is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not trust anyone who comes to you in this manner; your caution should be greater than necessary and your eagerness; and do not assume any cause without first obtaining certain knowledge that verifies this for you, and to which successful succession brings praise.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use this method in the treatment of all your illnesses for diagnosis and indication of that to which you are converted for salvation, as in that case, it is helpful to you for acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, may God inspire your understanding and not lead you astray with false directions and protection, as that is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you should distinguish this chapter by headings that follow the second chapter on cauteries, of the cure of the head between the feet, so that it is clear to you what is being asked about and for which you have a need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the cure of gout which is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You should know that this disease is caused by cold in infants and when the child's head is exposed to the cold, it becomes inflamed.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it is caused by an unknown reason.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have never seen this disease except in children; and to all those who I have seen, it also had this characteristic, which is that they were likely to die, and for this reason, I have seen many of them left without treatment.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head which was full of water, and the head of it was always swollen until it could not be placed on its size, and more than the moisture increased until the fire died.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is added between the bone and the skin, or it is added behind the bone on the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation in that case where the moisture is between the bone and the skin and the abscess is small, then cut in the middle of the head at one slit in the latitude, and the length of the slit should be two nights until the moisture runs out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the humidity is increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions of this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is below the bone, then you should open all the incisions of the head and pour the water into them when you understand that the wound is clean and not to your liking.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	However, if you cut in the middle of the head, make three incisions according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And remove all the moisture from the incision; and strengthen the incisions with cloth and feathers; and apply that liquid over the fifth day, and remove the scab and cure the wound with dressings, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little moisture until that member is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of water, where some people have it in the occipital region, or in the part that is affected, or on the right side, or on the left; and then attend to the incision where the abscess appears and the collection of water, and do that which you find most possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and engage it in flow of blood and cause death to the patient by that flow of blood during evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries that are close to the ears, called temple arteries.
Capitol segon.	Chapter 2.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When something happens to someone who has had cataracts or wounds in the legs or chest, and that is not treated, and no healing is found in that, then this incision of those two arteries would be the cure for that.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore cover when you want to incise those that the patient's head has, and approach the location with dry cloth to prevent the arteries from appearing, and approach the collar of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein is; and the locations of each above the locations that are close to the ears, and they are hidden in only a few people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And therefore cover over the artery with a tent, and approach each incision at the tip of each part until it reaches within the bone, and that is for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the needle beside the artery and cut that which is incident to the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if the length of the incision is two such adjustments, then when a vein is cut, the blood flows out quickly, which is often fatal by frequent occurrence.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the armor does not appear at the skin, then measure the amount of the aureola from three such spaces, and then try to insert it, and pierce the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that amount of blood drawn from the wound is one uncia, and if it does not draw more or less, then all of it depends on the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the replacement of the armor in him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the swelling, and if there is some cause of suppuration under the bone, then cut it open to prevent it from becoming an abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the swelling with feathers and with lint from linen, and then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of the stones that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When one has experienced ancient or sudden attacks of headaches, due to humidities of agrimony and quality in the fingers of the temples, or severe ancient pain similar to those, and it is treated with medical methods and this does not help, then we have shown extraction of the stones in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises their fingers in the temples; and understands the stone that is apparent in the temple where it is shown by its sides, and it is hidden only in a few people due to the force of the blow.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then the patient's collar should be strengthened with some cloth; and then apply force to the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the stone appears to you clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And here is the form of the spoon you should use:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And here is the form of the spoon you should use: when you reach the arch, and then scrape the wound and remove any excess from the parts that are not covered by the spoon, and then remove the bandages that were left there, all of them.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with a thread at the end of the needle, and then cut one part according to the amount by which its extremities were stretched and contracted, and if they are not cut, the blood will not stop flowing from them.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then empty the blood from the wound in one drop at a time.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the wound is large, then cover it with two layers of soft cloth or cotton strings, and do not let it become infected during the healing process and prevent the flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away any excess that is between two layers; and do this at the same time or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that pointed cautery into the hole of the pointed cautery until the edges of it are incised, and it will be in the place of that work of that metal.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better to do this if the patient has fever or a scalded complexion; because cauterization is one of those causes that help to finish moisture, and therefore it is better in cases of improvement.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover the extraction of the archers that collapse the original location, and place them on clean wool made decently, and then apply appropriate dry medicines to heal the flesh and warmth within until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while working on another adventure, you find blood flowing from the archer's wound, then you should press that blood, or the pointed cautery, or what fills the original location, and press your hand inside until the blood is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any of those causes is not present to you, then place your hand over the location where the wound is congealed, and dip the location in very cold water until the sharpness returns, and then press it again according to what covers.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And this is the most commonly used method for extracting arrows, which involves cauterizing the vein with this cautery that has two points, so you can feel both locations where it enters, and pause when it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that the part between the extremities of the arrow is lengthened, as they are not all solidified by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two points is as follows:
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the sharpness of two points is too great, it is better to have less sharp ones, because if they are very sharp and approach each location, they will not cut the flesh at high speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, in those cases where there is some thickness, the heat of the fire should be applied to them and the flesh should be cut more easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better than all other works and is more useful.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two points should be equal to the thickness of the arrow.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Fourth.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of bodies affected by sharp and acidic ulcers on the wounds.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acidic ulcers are on the body of those who have veins above their forehead, and there is no cause for medical cure in that area, and the face of the patient becomes wrinkled and feels as if it were wrinkled like the face of a lizard, and the wounds of those people are extended, humidified without any reason that their hairs are known, and the patches of their skin are scabbed by the acidity of their tears, the ancient remedies in the cure of those of this operation, and they named that cure am spassa.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions equally spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision falls short: the first incision should be equally spaced according to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little bit of the movement of the eyelashes that are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful of the two archers' positions, and extend your hand from the continuation of the jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each beginning is three times as much, adjust it.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge or dry cloths, use them to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then place the spatula between two sharp ends, of which this is the shape of the incision of it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part of the temples into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Scrape away all the tissue that is between two incisions above the bone, and do so from the incision that is moving towards the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then spread this spatula and place it into the first incision another way, using another tool called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place your hand on the sharp side of the bone, and the other side on the meat attached to the tissue, and push it until it reaches the second incision, and cut away all the vessels that descend from the head to the hips.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	While continuing the incision at this point of the codex, and then make that in the median fissure into the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the amount of blood is equal, express the locations of the patient's toes with a ligature.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place your hand in each fissure of the old man's body, and place your hand on those bones that are already infected with pus and oil and pus, and make sure they do not become an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of water or tea, and then cure that with an ointment made of basilicon, oil, and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the cure of gravel by means of catheter and the descending urethra from the parts below the cap.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When a person has been catheterized and continues to do so, and the urethra of the patient is narrowed and its walls are weakened, and their eyelids are ulcerated and they cannot close them, and in front of the cap there is sharp pain and external discomfort, then you know that the catheter and the materials do not come from the motas veins from below.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best cure for these is to command the patient to turn their head, and then make a small incision on the right side of their forehead, near the temple; this incision should go through the bone; and extend your hand under the temples, which are often bruised from the beatings, until you reach the bone.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry out all the pus with gauze or dry cloth, and then fill between the two lips of the incision with old cloth or cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply a clean bandage above the wound to prevent pus from forming again.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the abscess has decreased, then apply a poultice inside the bone where it begins in the flesh, and use the same dry regimen as if you were taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of columbine and mixing them together, and making this into a poultice to be applied to these wounds on the flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment of that which attacks the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All the causes that attack the ears are of four species, either it is a mineral stone or a similar cause to a stone, such as iron and copper, or it is a plant cause such as celandine or fava, or it is a fluid cause such as water and vinegar and other similar substances, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when a stone attacks the ear or another similar cause to those causes that do not fit in the ear, and if the ear is blocked, then place it in the sunlight, and if you see the stone, then distill some violet oil or sage into the ear, and administer the extraction of it, and make the person sneeze as a condition, and open the nose to prevent the onset of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, because these remedies are effective against these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not extracted spontaneously, then administer extraction with the instrument called the epicaricatory needle with this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if the needle is inserted, it is good; otherwise, then administer extraction with the thin needle of doubled-up glass.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not extracted by that, then make a needle of aram and insert the end of the needle into the auditory canal and seal around the needle with wax and softened oil so that it is not pushed in but only the needle.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract it with the strong attraction of the suction cup that we have found.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not extracted in this way, then take a piece of alum or a piece of prepared material that has a small amount of the substance, place it at the end of a ray, and wrap it around that side that is properly placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the auditory canal with ease, and then dry the ear from the moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	If all the causes that we have mentioned are not forgotten, then you should proceed to incise the part where the abscess or spasm occurred.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of incising that part is to first ligate the patient's sephasic vein and then remove it according to the method of the virtue of the wound, and then make a small hole in the area where the gold of the wound is located, and insert a drainage tube in the most affected part of the wound.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the incision is in the shape of a crescent moon until it reaches the bone, and the bone is found, then you can use appropriate instruments to remove that part; and then make the incision in that hour with speed, and heal that part before it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause is one of the grains that are believed to be inflamed and inflatable, then you should administer treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your instructions, then you should take a thin needle according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer that abscess of that wound which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do that when you think that that wound has already been moistened by the vapor from the ear, and pause it in small pieces, and try to extract those from the areas where there are onions or subtle gestures, or at the beginning, as we have said, which is praised for the extraction of it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	May the water that enters the ear canal be used for sneezing, and fill the ear with an old cloth, and put it on the ear in which the water is, and if by that it is removed, good; and if not, take many small pebbles and lions according to the length of the said, and cook those in the fire for a short time, and let the patient put one of those in the throat of his ear canal and strike with another pebble on the pebble that is in the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not stop this treatment until all the water is fully drained.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once all the water is drained, take a piece of paper or cloth, and place one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until it is completely burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put in another cloth and make as many folds as possible until all the water is drained, and remove that which was used to extract the stone, as described above.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	When extracting a beast entering into that ear, if it is small, use the same method and similar tools as described in the division; but if it is large and causes pain to the side of the intestine, then administer the extraction of it with care and precision, and the cause of this is less likely than all other causes found in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	When extracting worms from the ear, if you follow the method described in division and in the treatise on distillations and do not compare your treatment, then cover the ear with a warm cloth.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if any cause of worms appears here, then remove that sharp or thin instrument, but if no cause appears, then take a narrow needle and widen it from the bottom of which this is the shape of it:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the thin end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can bear; and then pull out that strong instrument, and make those movements until all the worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if they do not obey you in this manner, then open and close the circuit of the candle according to what we have said; then administer distillations that have been used in the past for the treatment of worms, and look for that in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your effusion is the one that you use to apply the medicinal oils in the ear with this instrument of which this is the shape of it:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or of iron, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and place it on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it should be done as they are in the cavity of the container here where it is necessary to serve.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the ray and wrap it around the end of the container decently, and then pour oil into the hollow of the container, or some herb, or whatever liquid from these medicines in the container — and that is in the aurelha —, and then insert the ray above and express your hand on that area to compress the temperature of the liquid until the oil is expelled into the hollow of the container and the patient feels the oil entering.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is in the aurelha should already be heated by the fire for a short time.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the substance you will distill in the aurelha is not too fragile, because the medicines of the aurelha cannot withstand such substances.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the cure of the opalescence of aurelhae.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some women have been born from the bellies of unmarried mothers, and such cases have occurred in some men, opalescence in the flesh of the aurelha by plague or by no flesh at all in that area; and this opalescence is sometimes made in the beginning of the wound of the aurelha which does not know the expulsion, and sometimes in the parts before.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And in the case where the first aid is not understood by the patient, it is in the major difficulties of healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the case where the first aid is understood by the patient, then place the ear of the patient to their sun and watch for it there.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an inflammation appearing, then open the thin spatula of which this is the shape of it:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it in which there is a small latitude, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula is of two lion lengths so that it does not touch the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the inflammation is caused by flesh in the ear or in the meat of it, then open several thin needles and incise that vehemence before it is completely stopped.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the inflammation is in the front of the ear, then take a thin needle and lift that needle in the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if the inflammation has been felt by the patient that they have found it difficult, because of the heaviness, then press that difficulty; and watch that you do not press the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place the second cloth of the same width as the opening of the wound that you have wrapped in the egg yolk; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any cloth and soak it in vinegar and powder it on the wound according to your choice, and use it; and if you see that the second cloth has become infected, then remove it and replace it with another one that you have wrapped in a cerot that is made of oiled clay, until the infection has passed; and then care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	And if there is a sudden flow of pus, then immerse a cloth or piece of cloth in cold water and place it on the wound, and use the other treatment that restricts the flow of pus, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the care of sty in the eye.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Sty in the eyes that sometimes occur in the eyelids of some people are warm, and some are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	So that you can hold those instruments or not, and cut those spatulas from their ribs, and place your hand on the locations according to the following:
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If the pain is caused by blood flow from a vein, then you should cauterize those spatulas with a pointed cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cauterization is to make incisions and burn away any remaining cause of the ribs; and when the spatulas are cauterized with fire, those ribs are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Cure for great swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	There are burns in the eyelids of the eyes that have some cause similar to swelling in its strength and hardness, and because it becomes larger, it is called a pimple.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And the accumulation of thick moisture under and above the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation in them is to consider whether the swelling comes from that which appears on the eyelid and is moist throughout; and the cause of it is unknown.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make an incision over that place to facilitate the extraction of the stone, and then scrape it from all parts until it is removed, and then suspend it with a string and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the incision of the stone is not covered and does not allow the point to enter the eye at the incision little by little, then it will never be known in any case.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then adjust it with stitches; and care for it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, it will not cause harm to that part where the oil of the stone restores it and encases it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the large stone declines to the parts of the eyelid, then remove the eyelid and suspend the large stone with a string, another that you do not know about the incision, and press it from all parts, and if the eyelid is elongated by the incision, then it will never be known in any case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, wash the wound with salted water; and care for it until it is healed with what encases it.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment of cataracts above the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Cataracts are gray spots that arise in the tunics of the eyelid above, and mainly affect children, aggravating their eyes and causing blindness to them; and they cannot see the clarity of the sunlight because of this.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you see that they are always talking about their eyes all the time, and over their sleeping eyes; and these have humid eyelids, which have already been covered by inflammation, and the appearance of cataracts is in the eye; and when you press the place with your fingers, you push the cataract into them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some method of operation is in that which the patient places his head on the finger, and then place cloth underneath him and around him, and make a circle according to the quantity that it contains throughout all parts, and then place that over that and press the fingers on the entire area so that cataract is aggregated in the middle of the circle, and then puncture in the middle of that humidity with a sharp point, and the puncture should not be larger than the puncture that is made in flaubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the prepuce where you are cutting the skin, make sure to reach the arcernach, as in the most displaced cases, arcernach is processed through a fissure in the form of white glans.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	So extract those wet cloths that you have wrapped between the patient's thighs and turn them between your right and left hand until they are spread out.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to adjust in the fissure, so that the spatula does not reach the glans and the other one descends.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If you do not see it at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust a small wet cloth in the fissure until it is processed; and then extract that one we have mentioned; and wipe away the blood with warm water and place them on the area and stretch those wet cloths.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And know that they sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure, so that that which is removed from that wetness.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which is sick.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if a pustule occurs in the area, then cure that with healing ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of the methods of touching the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the edges of wounds are not adjusted by natural hairs and are antiquated, then touch those to the wound and make methods of maladies as with frequent tears and softening of eyelids and cloth until that which is causing destruction of the wound, which is called tactinir of the wound, and cure it in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization; or by atactini at the beginning and sutura; or by cannulas as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore cover that you place the cap of the patient on your left; then convert the eyelid to your left hand, and if it is converted, it is good; otherwise, insert a needle in the part where the pus is behind the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the part above, and that which is — near the margin of the eyelid where there are no hairs — near the hairs, and pull the thread above the eyelid, and convert it to the right.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then insert a thin probe into the lower part of the eyelid, adjusting it between the eyelashes and the lacrimal canal; then remove the foreign body and place it next to the eyelid, wiping it with cotton or cloth, and then cover the eye with a clean cloth, as in the figure of a bandage.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But remember that the figure should be according to the degree of elevation of the eyelid, which varies among men, as some require that it be inserted into the eyelid a large amount according to the amount by which the eyelid is relaxed.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then insert the thin probe over the two lines that you have placed, and begin from the lacrimal canal to the lower lacrimal canal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural eyelashes, it should be as large as possible.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the onion in one of the two angles of the eyelid, and scrape it all off, and then adjust the stitches on the two lips with some thin wool or silk thread, and remove the crust, and make any excess glue on the two eyebrows with some ointment, if you want to do that, otherwise, do not worry.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And after three or four days, approach the stitches of the wounds, and cure that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the stitches in place, and cure that with a poultice made of what dries and constricts, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and its aggregation; but stitches are better, and therefore do as the ancients did.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But it is still necessary to be careful with the patient, and it is a good operation, and not in fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way in taxanir, and it is that you put a figure on the eyelid with fuel oil, and then raise the eyelid by three fingers and separate and gather according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do that, then take three fingers, and if it is not equal, take a needle in which there is thread, and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other needle in the larger lacrimal canal, and the second in the smaller lacrimal canal, and adjust between the two needles according to their equality, and then raise your hand with an equal elevation, and raise the entire eyelid over the one where it is recommended to be.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is not healed yet.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If an abscess occurs on your incision or fistula, cover that abscess with a plaster and the same ointment, and apply it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Sometimes the eyelids become swollen and converted into scars, so use the ointment that we mentioned for incision; but stitching is more artificial in such cases.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To bandage the legs follows this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you should fold the cloth and cut it according to the figure that I have mentioned; and then make two narrow strips of the same length as the eyelid and slightly wider than the width of the palm.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already made incisions at the ends of each section where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And then add each narrow strip under the excess skin of the eyelid, and tightly wrap each section with strong stitches, and leave it for several days until the skin under the stitch dies and becomes discolored and rots within a few days if it is not properly treated.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is too late, then break the bone with a hammer, and then cure the pain until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not prick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make these tubes:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width neither too much nor too little.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of lifting the sharp hairs in the eye socket when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are not natural, hard, sharp, and prickly hairs, then the operation is that you take a thin needle and place it in a soft and sharp cedar wood, and then adjust the ends of it and the nails in a subtle way.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the needles is the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you place another thin needle next to it in a short time, and if you want, remove the ends of that one.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and position it close to the sunlight so that your work can be clearly seen, for this is a delicate and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the eye socket that requires it, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly before it goes out of the natural position.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the eye out and insert it into the solution, and place one or two or three but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand out and insert it into the solution, and place it in the eyelid to return it to its natural position.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is not returned to its position, then insert the solution at the parts where you have prepared it, and wait until it returns to its natural position.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then apply it to the eye, as you have done before, and wait until it adheres to its position and heals, and leave the cloth for two or three days, until the eye has healed and returned to its natural position.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the wound is too short, then adjust a longer one from the natural hairs, and raise it to that one, or until it is long enough to be evenly spaced, and then raise that one.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	About the treatment of the eyelid that is above the eye.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the eyelid is drawn downwards, and the contraction of the eyelid occurs when it is turned upwards, to the right or left part, due to poor consolidation of the eyelid or dryness or cauterization, and this is called entropion, and whether it is natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor consolidation of the eyelid or dryness or cauterization, or similar to them.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the operation in it be that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it in that which is between those a wad of cloth of linen, and tie them together when they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not use treatment of it from the causes that dry and constrict; because if you do that, it returns to be drawn downwards more than at any other time.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in those cases where there is a cause that melts like fenugreek, and rub the water in which they are soaked and mixed with him, or apply dayquilon, which should be liquefied with some oil, and pour it into that place, and cure that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your cure is that you puncture all the engine that is not consolidated according to the form that fire has at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation, which we have said, is only a correction of echalixacrati that does not return the form of the place according to what fire gives.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter xiv.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of echalixacrati that is made in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This echalixacrati that is made in the eyelid, which is not named vertadierament echalixacrati; and it is of some nature, other accident.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Other accidents are made by plague or by cutting or by cauterization or by other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle in which you make double thread, and place it on the flesh, and make it pass from the lacrimal of the left eye into the lacrimal of the right eye, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the flesh to the parts above and below the needle, and cut it with the needle, and insert it into a wide space.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the shape of the eyelid returns to normal after the cut, it is good; otherwise, take the needle and place it on the broken figure, and with that, convert the eyelid, and make both wounds on the side of the eyelid behind.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of both wounds should be made into two angles at the beginning, which you have made while they are converging, and make the angle of each one into a figure when they come together.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter lambda: λ.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then place the flesh there for the amount that is on the side of the eyelid behind it, which will close the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and tie them with wool thread; and then take care of those that we have said about the softening medicines and the poultices inside which it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the wound is caused by a laceration or suture or cauterization, then make sure that you cut the flat incision on the eyelids according to what is prescribed.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the sermon on the cure of lacerations when it is raised or lowered, that the blood flows in the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of laceration, and that is in the form of various shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the artificer always prepares everything in every possible way that is possible inside which it makes return to the figure in its natural form, or near to that, and the patient according to what suits the operation and the tools in the best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in men who have their eyelid stuck above the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from facilitating movement and their natural works, therefore you should insert the extraction of the ray under the eyelid, and raise it to that area, or extend it to the eye.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you should insert the adhesion into a thin space, which is not sharp for incisions, having a small opening so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remain the space that does not descend the white of the eye from its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should excoriate that adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you should apply saltwater to the white of the eye, which you wash; or distill it with lavender dissolved in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the conjunctiva of the eye, place over the conjunctiva a piece of waxed cloth soaked in honey, and use the third day to apply consolidating remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of the beginning of a nail and the elevation of flesh from the eyelids.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You should know that a nail is of two kinds, either it is nervous, which is similar to a hard, fine thread; or it is not nervous, similar to white moisture gathered together, which when it touches the eye, often takes on an ulcer, which is then abscinded and the ulcer does not stick to it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And the special nerves do not begin until the major lacrimal, which gradually covers the vision and prevents the light and movement of the conjunctiva.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	When the nerve works at the beginning of it, the patient should place his head on his elbow, and then raise the conjunctiva of the eye, and lift the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail from the ulcer with a pair of tweezers and extend it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert it into the joint of the cavalry horse or ox or cow, or similar animals, or strong iron, or double the tip of the needle small by small and place it in the middle of the nail, and pierce that with the needle, and hold the nail firm; and extend that to the parts above, and excoriate the skin on the side of the nail which is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then continue that with the needle through the back of the patient.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you insert the needle into the space of the lacrimal duct with a thin spatula or small forceps, and remove the flesh of the lacrimal gland so that it does not continue to produce continuous tears after insertion of the needle.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is extended or held firmly as we have said, and then excoriate the skin on the side of the needle which has this shape:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the corneal tunic and that it breaks in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Approach the beginning of the foot with a small amount of salt or salted water, and leave it there for several days; then care for that wound to ensure it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not tender and you cannot insert the needle, or it does not stick in that place, then this type of nail is healed with medicines, and it is healed as well as possible and recommended for use in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that, then you begin by opening the thigh of the patient and taking a thin, sharp lancet of suitable sharpness in this form:
am subtilitat.	with thin sharpness.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is rarefied and contracted and begins to form in that place, then pour some of your own urine into the foot bath made of salt or rose oil or salted water, and keep it there for several days.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation on that until everything that is in it has been removed, but if the contrary abscess causes pain in the wound, then leave that and cure the abscess when it begins to heal.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And continue your operation until the patient is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The problem with the lacrimal gland, if noticed to be causing great harm, should be removed surgically; and incise that part, but do not end the incision because you do not want to cause excessive tear flow.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then drip some medicine into the lacrimal canal and let it heal until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	About the incision of the lacrimal gland and that which is born from flesh adjusted in the eye socket.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes flesh is born in the eye socket, and it is overgrown before covering the pupil, or approaching or stretching over the eyelids and strongly pressing the eyelids to the parts of the eye and is assembled at the edge of a balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	During the operation, the patient should pause their head on the table; and then open the eyelids of that person and collect all that flesh with an incision convenient for that, and that with a forceps or a hook; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished by the cutter, and guard yourself from the eye socket that you do not descend that which is your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And insert your instrument into that which you inserted those or the spatula we recommended in the beginning of the needle, or small forceps by which you gather the abscess according to how the form of it approaches this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then, when your instrument is completed and the entire area is cleaned, fill the wound with salt-soaked cloth, or pour in the powdered herb mixed with a similar corrosive medicine, and place a sterile cloth over the wound until it is ensured that the abscess has been successfully drained.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause for alarm and the patient's condition is seriously endangered, and you fear an abscess formation, then lance the wound and treat that abscess with whatever remedy that heals that abscess, and repeat this operation until it is healed, and similarly treat the surrounding flesh which has been affected by this condition.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must ensure that all care of the wound is performed through natural or accidental means, using iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you are sure that that member has suffered this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of collection of blood in the abdomen.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Blood vessels that are tortuous over the abdomen and prevent the surgeon from performing their operation, and they develop the abdomen in length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider whether the abdomen in which there is blood is strong and in it there is no other disease than blood, then you collect that blood.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And if you command the patient to lie on their back and suspend those veins with one or two according to your judgment; and that thread should be of fine double thickness according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two threads gradually in a coil according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then those veins are collected with fine forceps, with fineness, and wipe them away hour by hour until they are removed from the abdomen and turned back.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to damage the abdomen at its extremities; and if your operation on the morning gives light, and you have a motive to stop in your operation that you do not insert those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed the procedure, then you should apply a cold or hot compress to the affected area to help reduce the inflammation that remains from the injury.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	However, if it is not possible to gather all of that at once, then you should apply the entire mixture that relieves the pain and leave it on for several days until the pain is alleviated and the wound is healed to prevent infection.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the process over the affected area until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the shape of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reducing hernias to their place.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you are treating hernias with cauterization or sharp medicine after the story of the injury has not healed, then do not insert into it but instead cut open the abscess to remove all the moisture inside and the pus until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or discoloration in it, then you should remove it with a tool of this shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And if it is known that the hard head, and it is made of iron, and the cap is rounded like the one that is made to be pierced by the needle or the aliscalfati for subtle puncture (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the location of the bone corruption, and then rotate it between the toes called, and gently press your hand into it until you know that that corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, and then restore the location with drying and styptic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the location is consolidated and it is in the new good flesh and the body is free from the sickness and it has lasted for forty days, and it does not recur and does not become an abscess and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then reduce the opening to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and you should find a second bone of iron or sharp medicine, and as soon as it is discovered, then take a tribune in this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The external part of the iron is triangular, and its tip should be inserted into the end as many times as possible.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place the other one over the bone, and the other one near the lacrimal; and move your hand away from the hollow, and turn your hand towards the tribe that penetrates through the bone, and the patient feels the pain as if a hot iron is passing through it.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, after restoring the place with stiffening and drying medicines that you have seen.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and the place are hardened, the matter that was flowing to the parts returns to the source, so this is more appropriate for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of the reduction of the prominence of the hollow.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hollow prominence does not cause any harm or reduction in the voiding, then cover the patient, and let it follow, and place many small incisions on the neck for good suction; and place a liniment made of acacia, aloe, earthworms, and sarcocolla on the hollow, and strengthen the plaster on the hollow with powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the way to make the bandages for the feet is to take cloths of lion's mane, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; and make those bandages.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place them one on top of the other according to the amount needed for the wound.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then apply strength to those bandages with strong and thick cloth; and repeat the dressings with successive sutures; and after removing the bandages, leave the wound straight for the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the ligament becomes soft, then it should be kept straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And after removing the bandages, keep the ligament as we have said for the day and night.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the wound has already been reduced, good; but if not, then repeat the ointment on the feet and the bandage until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	About the beginning of the extension of the uvea.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When the tear in the uvea is disrupted, and it extends out of the eyelids like a thick line, and it takes on the form of a man by that, and you want to incise it, then the operation is as we have recommended, that you enter the needle into the edge of the uvea from the part below to the part above, and place another needle in the part that is double the thickness of the lacrimal duct, and make that penetrate, and leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the double thickness and pull up that part of the uvea around the needle, and apply strength to that.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place it on the woollen thread soaked in album of egg and lime, and let the thread go through the eye of the needle.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for that part where the pain is located until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some bandages are gathered from all parts of the cloth and wrapped around the wound in a circular manner, and then pierced with a thin spatula that reaches the base of the wound, and let the albumen moisture descend, and then lower the bandage and insert it quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of wounds.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease that is called cataract is not other than a wound which is adjusted in the wound like descending water and is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The way to work on it is that the patient should lie down on the prepared bed and spread out, and then take the cup in your hands from two parts and pour that into the wound where you see the wound coming to the parts behind, and then dry it and do not let it descend, and let the light be, and the wound will see its causes as it usually does.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not come down in the foot, you will know that it is a water retention.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	However, if the descent is not prepared in a normal way, then make the patient lie down between your hands and gently take a thin sponge and place it on the cornea (at the edge of the eye), until the pus is removed from the eye.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, when the pus is removed, you will distill water with honey in which you have mixed melted honey and water in which you have already made a solution of fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then, treat the other causes until they are cured.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the treatment of water descending from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and what is appropriate to pierce according to the speech declared, then that one.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then, make sure you make the patient lie down between your hands on a soft bed and hold their eye closed tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your hand near the eyelid of the sick person, if the water is on the left side; or place your hand directly, if the water is on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then take a sponge with your right hand, if the water is on the left side; or take a sponge with your left hand, if the water is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the sponge at the end of the sponge near the crown for the thickest part of the ray in the album of the eyelid on the side of the lower lacrimal, and then wring out the sponge and turn your hand to that.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then insert the sponge into the eyelid and feel that the sponge has reached the cause of the swelling.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And you will see that the length of the sponge is equal to the distance between the edge of the pupil and the end of the eyelid; which is the crown of the eyelid, because you will see the pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunica.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Approach the area where the water is, and then throw a cloth down there, and if the water starts to spread, then lift the patient's head slightly, and approach the cloth to the wound.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then pause for a moment; if the water starts to spread, then pause the other cloth in front of where it is not soaked.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is dry and does not spread, then remove the cloth gently, and wipe the wound little by little with your hand, and dissolve a small amount of clear salt crystal in water and apply that to clean the wound; and then place a cotton ball or infused linen soaked in rose-scented oil and album of egg and bandage the wound with that.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	We also use those that are from our time, such as egg album.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey the cloth to the instrument of the wound because of its hardness - which is one of those men whose wound is hard - then cover that which you take with the spatula, which is called the handle of the instrument:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that joint at that location, do not leave your hand in the wound, and see if you are not making a delicate incision.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then make a second delicate incision as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must complete the work of your patient, who should be prepared for a surgical procedure that is done while they are lying on their back in a dark room, and should be prohibited from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place your hand on their chest to make sure their nature is smooth and does not cause any damage to their head or the entire body.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the wound heal according to its position by the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that from that dark room and extract the free fluid, and examine some causes, and then return the wound to the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not forget that you should do this at the time of the cures or soon after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having remembered that you should do this in order for the water to be able to flow more easily and forcefully.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If an abscess occurs, you should lance it with a sharp instrument on the seventh day, and then apply a poultice to that area to help heal the wound.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then examine the patient's face and place your hand over their mouth to help them expel phlegm from their lungs, which is often found in the darkest part of the body.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually remove that phlegm from that part and discuss its causes with the patient.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in some cases, the student of medicine is not exempt from certain weaknesses, and then you should be careful with your operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have heard of some of those things that are in the Arabic, and some say that fire is made in the air to perform a certain operation where water is succeeded.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen such an operation performed in our land, nor have I found it in any of the books of the ancients; and it may be new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magic by which one can perform those operations that those who do not know them do.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And if the pain is caused by sharp or iron objects properly, and their external parts are like this triangular subtlety, the sharp edge has the same form as that one.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	About the cure of meat not in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are different meats adjusted from which some cause is assembled like a scorpion of fish, or a polyp; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that fish represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from there meat cancerous, the pale, of dark color; and from there meat lion not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in those meats lion not fraudulent nor cancerous, cover that you make the patient sneeze between your hands and put it in the sunlight, and pierce the nose of it, and pick out the tumor in those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the parts of the foreskin, and then cut off what you have understood from those meats sharp space subtle of one part through which you know that all the meat is already open; because if there is any cause from the qual la abscisio es possibla, then you remove that with one of the subtle instruments am facilitat entrance which from it came with any cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the lord has been afflicted with an abscess or post-apostemic carbuncle, then pause at that place; or it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize the part where the pus has been drained and all the cavities have been closed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then apply a poultice made of charcoal and vinegar or wine to the affected area.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the wound is opened and moisture enters into the mouth, then know that it is healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If moisture does not enter after the drainage, then know that there is no flesh in the pus under the bones of the nose to which it has not reached the abscess.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, after the drainage, if there is any swelling in the place to which it has not reached, and you make a poultice of the same amount of herbs and apply it between each nostril, and examine the patient and introduce an end of the cloth into the nose with the ray or another cause that is possible at that time.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And then, when that is done, draw the patient's own odor into their nose, so that it reaches the nostrils, and place it on their golayro, as many troops of children in school do, and this is the likely cause for those who want to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place both of the patient's extremities on their nose, one on top and the other underneath, and administer salt from meat that is already on the patient's nose, and do this while you know that the meat is already on the patient's nose.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the patient, and place in their nose the abstraction of honey and vinegar, and do this for three days or more until all that remains of the meat is rotten.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And finally, at the end of the cause, place in their nose a goose quill filled with oil until they are healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if it does not work, use this one instead.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is the form of the instrument used to purge the nose, which is distilled in oil and medicines:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Make it from silver or from iron, which is similar to a small lamp covered with a small bowl, like this:
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed canula like this with a cane, and the canula of the instrument used to purge the nose should be flat, open; at which has a handle in the back of it, which you hold when you pour in the oil or the liquid that you want from the sucs and from the causes suctiblas.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this is the recipe for the purge: take castor beans, white alum, ginger, pepper of safra, long pepper, escafragia, and spice ana one unc. Mix it with the juice of bleda and of caul, and make it into pills, and dissolve one pill in warm water, and put it in the nose of the patient just as he is about to fall asleep.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About the nostrils on the outside of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The nostrils on the outside of the nose are often blocked, and they are magnificent and open on other days when it is not looked at closely.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for that reason, you should insert a probe into the beginning of the appearance of it, and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place your hand or cauterizing instrument over the area where the burning medicine was placed.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the insertion of the probe is delayed until it becomes magnificent, then consider whether it is calcified, hard, black in color and has little sensation, do not touch that iron which is a crusty abscess; because the nostrils are often blocked by the great malice of that which the person had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of lion-like appearance and is not black in color, and insertion is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and insert that medicine with fear, and cure the area with what dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of sutures of the nose and lips and of the earlobe when continuity is dissolved by a wound or similar injuries.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You should know that when continuity is lost in one of these cartilages, you should not perform surgery on it, but rather on other men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, if you have any reason to consider one of those, whether it is a fresh wound or its scar, and then you adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure that within which it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of continuity loss are already separated, and each one is healed, then consider that you should excise each part of its scar within which it does not form a scar.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with stitches and strengthen those, and above them powder dragon's blood and three-grained cinnamon, and place a dressing of diachylon plaster or of any other consolidating plaster on top of the powder, and leave that for two days or three, and then remove that and replace it with another plaster and leave it until the wounds have healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the needle of the suture be such that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the abdominal suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you have done and make it known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that come in the lower lips in the parts divided.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Some boils are found in men in the divided parts of their lower lips, similar to hard abscesses, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should turn the lips and cut each of those hardness in that part, and then fill the abscess with healing herbs until it is strong, and then wash it with very hot water and cure the area with what has stiptic properties, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the beginning of flesh attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A large number of boils are attached to the gums, which the ancients called albus, so you should suspend that one or the one you have with the forceps and incise that one at its base, and let the blood run out or the wound heal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then place a dry or stimulating powder on the wound location.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then insert it secondarily, and cauterize it, so that the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for iron teeth.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When sharp, rough, and sometimes black scales are adjusted on the surface of the teeth, in the mouth, and between the gums, they are yellow or green, and through this corruption the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore you should brush the patient's teeth between their hands and place their head on your knee, and remove those scales that appear similar to sand, and through which no cause of decay has ever occurred, and this is how blackness, yellowness, and other discolorations are caused.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If this is the case at the beginning of the reasoning, then it is good; otherwise, you should repeat the reasoning on those teeth every other day and the second and third time until it reaches the desired state.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you should know that teeth require different shapes and sizes of files and instruments according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so that you know how the file that is used to shape the part of the tooth that is not cut is different from the file that is used to smooth between the teeth in other shapes, and these shapes of files should be prepared by you as follows:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	That you cure the tooth of all its pain and delay in the entire extraction of it, because there is no cause that should supplement the weight of it when it is extracted, because the substance sublimates within which the extraction is made.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May you also be certain when the patient is ready to have that tooth extracted, because the pain deceives the patient and makes him think that it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is extracted, which we have already seen in the operation of the teeth.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you need to certify which tooth is hurting, and if you know how to do it, first scrape around the circumference of the tooth with some tool that has some usefulness, until it is dissolved from the tooth from the gum in all parts, and then remove that with tweezers or fine forceps, bit by bit until you have removed those.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then place a large wooden spatula in the patient's strong jaw for good loquacity or to prevent suffocation, and place your hand on the patient's head between their teeth so that they do not bite you, and then remove the tooth straight in a way that does not give them more pain or harm the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not forgotten, then take one of those tools, and place it there to facilitate and reduce the effort in removing it at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or worn, then make sure to wrap that break and tighten it with a fine wire at its end so that it is not crushed in your construction over that at the jaw.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should work carefully on the incision around all part of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not tear that and remain a part of it, and return over the patient for the major pain that is the first pain of him.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And guard yourself that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their practice and audacity in the eradication of them, which they do not administer what we have recommended; for many wounds bring on great illnesses that are much harder than tooth extractions, and the reasons for their success are all, or some of those, or that they extract that with the wounds which we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And the eradication of him is washed the mouth with vinegar or with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is a flow of pus through the wound, which also occurs with many wounds, then cut off some amount of zeolite and sprinkle it on the wound, and if you do not find that zeolite, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and holding them subtly is such that it is praised for its long handle and thin, so that they do not bend when performing those tasks.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And if there are times of thick handles that when you hold them, they are not bent, they are short extraction tools.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And if they are made of iron from India, they are straight extraction tools, and in their handles, there are teeth of those that one puts into the others and they are held together by a strong constraint, and sometimes they are shaped like the beak of a stork, which is called ciconia, so it is gripping, and they are of great constraint.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and extraction of bones from the jawbones that are impacted.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you have to remove a tooth that is impacted, it is often caused by some reason, then place your hand over the place where the bone is located for a day or two until that place becomes soft; and then use anesthesia or hold the extraction tools whose shape resembles the beak of a stork called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The outer parts of their joints were cut with a knife or a chisel.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if they do not obey your order to open their mouth or let you hold it, then force them to open their mouth and remove all the flesh, and insert the instrument called the almucia, which is a small hook with this shape:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if it is short and thick, make it slightly thin, but not too much so that it does not become square.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the mouth is opened, good; otherwise, use these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular extramitation with some roughness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more delicate tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you have already helped with this instrument having two ramps, which is the appropriate shape as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And you will need other instruments that I will describe in the removal of teeth; because it is very important to do this instrument, which is similar to an awl, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the triangular distal end that is too short or too thick, which should not be too thin to avoid being triangular.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And other wise men say that the instruments of teeth are like the others.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The artists are wise and subtle in the art, and for this reason they use different tools according to what it signifies for each operation and various diseases; because of the different shapes of various species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are triangular, then it is necessary to be careful with that one in its place according to what is convenient for the tools and the forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help you with the handling of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any thickness little by little, and it is stretched or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or enter until the bone of all is completely removed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines for that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small pustule on the bone, then prick that pustule and its black core, and cure it within so that it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	About the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent and do not follow their natural course, and especially when they grow towards women, and more so towards revered virgins; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is not close to another tooth, and it cannot be sawed off or extracted with a linament, then you should remove that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then you should incise it with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it is similar to a pig's tusk, and it should be made of Indian iron of extramatted metal for its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And if your incision is too deep and it takes several days to heal because of the hardness of the tooth, and it is not connected to another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is necessary to spread it out, then use this Indian iron knife of the following form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should all be made of Indian iron; and the handle should be the same; and it should have many pointed tips like needles, which are used to cut a little at a time in a few days, so that no other tool is needed and becomes dirty.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then draw it along the line, and scrape it with a razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is of the kind that one part is soaked and lies on the tongue, then make sure that you scrape that part which has been wetted by that fraction is stopped and covered, and filled so that the tongue does not descend or the word is not corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of teeth that are damaged by gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents occur to the teeth due to impact or fall, and the patient cannot bear it, and you have treated them with hemostatic medicines, and your treatment has not been effective, then in order that they do not rot in those that are strong by gold and not by silver, because silver turns yellow and becomes porous over time, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And if the bone is so thin and grooved according to the amount that could enter between the teeth; and the form of the reaming is that you take the bone and take double of it between two healthy teeth, and approach that it increases am two twists of the bone between two dirty ones, or if one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And approach the tying inside the part where you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and knowledge until it is not dirty.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your tie should be the one that strengthens the bone from the roots of the teeth that do not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And approach the excess parts of the bone with forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place with gesture, and convert them into those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the dirty one, so that it does not cause damage to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And leave that which is so tight as to be Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is loose or broken, strengthen that or those with another bone in such a way that they are all in their time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the form of healthy teeth and the figure of straight teeth, such as these often are:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when a tooth or teeth return to their proper place in the mouth, and are restored as we have recommended, and remain so.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Only skilled craftsmen and wise people can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Some people are prone to certain bone conditions of cows, and it is made from them in the form of teeth, and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and strengthened as we have said, and remains there for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	About the beginning of the ligament that is in the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that is located behind the tongue in some people or is natural to them, or accidental and occurs due to a wound that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation involves opening the mouth of the patient, removing the existing cap from the tooth; and elevating their tongue, and then inserting that nerve ligament according to the latitude before the tongue is re-established in its original position.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any difficulty or stiffness in that area, and this is due to the consolidation of a plague, then you should apply pressure and cut it through the width until it is torn and the stiffness is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to make a cut in the flesh and that you do not tear the muscle here and cause bleeding of the sinews.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the footprints of the incision with warm water or vinegar or warm water; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from being consolidated again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If bleeding occurs, place your hand over the wound; if the sinew is torn, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery that is suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some tongue swellings occur before the tongue, resembling a small pimple that prevents the tongue from performing its natural operation; and if it is not filled with the mouth, it becomes magnified.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in this case is to open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and consider the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of dark or black color, hard and without sensation, then do not touch that which is cranial.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is declined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you put the sponge in it, and insert a sharp needle under it, and cut it from all parts; and if the pus ventures out during your operation, then pause above the three fingers, it is vinegar, until it is restricted.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have completed it, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and cure that one with the other cure at that time until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of abscesses from the armpits and from those that are in the groin and of other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess occurs in the groin, they are glands that resemble wool, which are deformed and called armpits, which when you cure them with what we have said in the division and are not healed, then you consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, and little pain, then do not touch it with a knife.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the pus is thick, then do not touch it with a knife because of the risk of infection; leave that inside to mature, and then you either rupture it or let it break by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, clear, and the pus of it is thin, then that should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation in it is that you consider, giving your operation, whether it has already subsided from the abscess with caution completely or if it has decreased somewhat; and then make sure the patient is lying on their side, and the head of it is in your hand, and the server takes between his hands the tongue of it, and the servant takes between his hands the instrument most noble of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or aram, and thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then, when you press the tongue and it shows you the abscess, and catches the pus on that, then take out the cotton and put that in the wound, and pull it from the sides as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that you pull from the causes of the tunic, and then approach the incision with this instrument of which this is the shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, but the outer parts of which are bent, so that the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, so sharp, which should be made of iron and thin.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	However, if this instrument is not at your disposal, then approach the incision with this space of which this is the shape of it: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And once you have incised one wound, then incise the other following this method of incision, and approach the incision to the patient who is guarding against water breakage
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the patient has diarrhea, guard against water from the decoction of senna or of figs and similar to those of the astringent causes that restrict the flow of the diarrhea, and cure it within that time.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes in the gullet others are pustules or those two wounds, and insert them second by second as I said at the beginning of these two honeyed remedies equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in her gullet, the abscess tended to a dark color, of little pain, which had already closed her gullet, and the woman was breathing very straight, and had already prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and had already reached death if more days passed.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had pushed so much that it had half a dozen openings between two veins.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So you made an incision carefully and inserted it into one of the openings, and pulled that out, and poured a large portion of it from there, and then you inserted it into another opening, and closed the mouth of it, and pressed her tongue, and then you inserted the other incision into that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you should bring a large amount of blood from him, but do not let any of it run out.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the absolute cure for that woman, and as soon as she begins to vomit, immediately administer food, and do not cease to incise that abscess with an old knife for a long time, until another abscess forms in its place, which should be incised before it is prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, you should apply pressure and cauterize the wound with an old knife, and then apply a poultice; and then walk around and do not let them know what God has done for that patient.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of a wound when it becomes abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh (mucus) descends to the wound, and it becomes abscessed and long, then it is not called perpendicular; and if it is in the part that is thick and round, then it is called a bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When the wound is cured with the remedy we have mentioned in the division, and you do not compare your cure, and if you see that the abscess has already disappeared from the wound and is thin, then you should incise that which has accumulated around it; and if it is at a distance, and is bloody, of a dark color or black, and is not on the surface, then you should make an incision in the wound, where there is fear over the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you see the second rib that I mentioned earlier, which is long and white, you should make an incision on the patient's body and take out their tongue with an instrument that fits its shape, and then place the bone in the new place, and pull the other one down and insert it into one of the two instruments called scissors at the beginning of the chapter.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And be careful not to insert it any more than what is adjusted to its natural term, because if you insert it too much, you will damage its speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then make the incision with the instrument that we recommended earlier, and heal it while it is still healthy.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision, then use the instrument in the cauterization of their fear, and the handle of the cautery should only be sharp water, and you should place the patient's head in your lap, and take out their tongue with the instrument that we mentioned earlier, and then take some of the water that we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the wound while it is still alive, and do not press too hard or too delicately, and fill the hollow of the instrument with this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The extramatum of the cavity where the medicine is placed should be like the shape of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and the patient turns their head to one side so that saliva or drool from the mouth of the other does not fall on the wound due to the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not cause any harm to the wound.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Then place your hand with the medicine on the uvula for a period of time until it becomes denigrated and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around that end of the needle, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the needle through the cloth into a canula over which the cloth adheres so that you can achieve the desired cauterization of the wound, and leave it there for three days or four until it dries up.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat that, and after the cauterization remove it from around the wound with a clean cloth in a circular motion, and change that which is inside the circle of the medicine, and wash it with water, and cure it with a warm compress, and give gargling rinses until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This type of treatment is more safe than beginning and longer than fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some wounds are cured with this method that is more subtle than cauterization and begins, which is cured by sublimation in this way: take calament, ysop, origan, ruda, scissored Arabic gum, camomile, borage, and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes or some of them in a bowl, and they should be submerged in very hot water and boiled; and the bowl should be well washed with decent water, and there should be a hole in the middle of the bowl where an instrument made of aram according to this method should be placed; it should be made of silver or aram.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And if the tip is inserted into the mouth of the patient before the steam reaches the uvula on the throat, before the uvula becomes obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And if you repeat this treatment until it dries, and keep in mind that you should not do this treatment at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, because it would adjust too much to the abscess, and do not let you do this, but declare the declaration of the abscess from there carefully.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument present, then take a cane and place a cloth of hay on its tip, to prevent the patient's mouth from being suffocated, as the cloth of hay prevents the smoke from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of thorns and of what adheres to the wound and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Fragments adhere to the wound or thorn of the foot or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then cover what you are removing from those that are apparent, over which the sight is placed, rather than using an instrument of silver, so that it can be declared to you what is in the wound.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not apparent and is hidden in the wound, cover it with the patient vomiting when the food is digested in the stomach, because often the cause attached to the wound is removed by vomit; or that the patient swallowed a bone of bread or a piece of raw meat or a bowl of dry bread; or took a sponge of sea sponge and soaked it well with wine, and then placed it on the patient, because as it passes through the place where thorns and are extracted, it is removed.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And then take a snake and boil it with a little vinegar, and extract the juice from it; or take a pig's foot and boil it in vinegar, and extract the juice from it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If you do not forget those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be as large as a small finger, and in its extraction, the cavity where you will insert it into the neck to facilitate.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And the hand is raised up to it, and be careful that the touch of its neck bones, so that it does not hurt it or the spine, or what that doctor puts on his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But if the patient feels pain from that insertion, because of his knowledge of the location of the cause and what he puts on it, and pulls his hand up with the instrument, all this according to the quantity that is prepared in him before it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of blood attached to the liver.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood attached to the liver is treated with the medicine we mentioned in the division of the cure and not with a cauterization, consider this: place your hand on the patient's abdomen at noon, as you have understood the instrument that we recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the blood attached to the liver, extract it with a small needle or a thin instrument carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it, then take a concave needle and insert it into the patient's abdomen, and place your hand on the concavity of the needle, and hold an ignited iron there (until the attached blood is dead and has come out of the abdomen) and keep the patient from drinking all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a full wet cloth and place it in the patient's mouth, and wash the mouth with that; do not let any of that cloth touch any cause and make the patient drink water for an hour, then another on their hand, so that the attached blood feels like water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If we have not forgotten the remedy we recommended earlier, then currently subfuse the patient with chamomile or asafetida using the instrument we recommended for fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do that, in four ways.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another way of operation in fumigation of that is to take an iron rod with burning coals and cover the rod with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the end of the instrument in that hole; then remove it from the fumigation; and place the patient's mouth on the end of the canula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not lost until you know that the fumigation has reached the lungs, as the lungs quickly absorb.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not catheterize, then repeat the fumigation after some time, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salty and other foods, and not drinking water, and if necessary, this diet should be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument used to treat gout in the great toe when it appears; and it resembles forceps sometimes, but with some curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed on the great toe, and its end resembles the beak of a heron, which grips, in which a rasp is attached, so that when a cause is found, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the speech on the detection and lancing of abscesses.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are special masses, like other masses, according to the recollection of them, each in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are different in puncture and incision of them by other means, one of which is for the kind of abscesses that contains pus; and because it understands the moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the places where the disease occurs in the body, as the abscess on the head is different from the abscess on the buttocks; and the abscess in the flesh is different from the abscess at the joint; and each of them has a suitable treatment.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And more about abscesses, some of which are not meant to be pierced until they have reached maturity and their fullness.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses that are supposed to be punctured when they are crossed, and not matured according to their fullness, just like abscesses that are directed towards joints, if an abscess is approaching a joint, then extend it into the area around it, and often the tendons or nerves of that joint are corrupted, so that it causes contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the puncture until it is matured, it will damage the principal member; or it is near the anus, so do not puncture this unmatured one, but rather the one that is directed towards the anus, so that it does not spread to the inside of the abscess and be extended to the parts of the anus, and it should be made a fistula, or what is made in the term of the abscess that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May you know the time of the puncture of the abscess, and do it when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is ripe when the pain subsides and the fever ceases, and there is a decrease in the inflammation and pulse, and an increase in the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you know that the puncture should be made in the place closest to the abscess and from where the pus comes out of the boil.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should be made quickly through the long bones of the body or the body, if the abscesses are in the joints of the legs or feet, and in the locations of the tendons, of the nerves, of the arches; and at the back, in all equal places where it does not reflect; because in those that reflect, use puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in fleshy places, it is customarily said that you should not make the puncture until it is confirmed that the digestion of it has been completed, as we have said; because if you puncture that one before, it prolongs the suffering of the patient and causes much pain, and very hard labors for him.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	May it be possible to perforate the abscess according to the size of the flesh or bone, depending on the need, or according to what the member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if you administer small perforations, and in large abscesses, a wide or deep cut according to the variation of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses, in which you should know that the incision should be made into the cavity and closed, when it is made as follows: with a needle and thread, as has already been mentioned, such as that which occurred in swellings of the throat and groin.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that have incision with three angles; and of those in which it is made as follows: with the shape of a leaf of myrtle, such as the abscesses of the elbows.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And in those in which round and crescent-shaped incisions are made, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May that one who cannot be found as such as the abscesses of lions, you should make a superficial perforation, or just plane it.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the abscess is large and has already collected a lot of pus, do not stop draining it; take out a piece, and the next day insert it into the other side, and then remove a larger piece, and do this gradually until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is very weak, female, pregnant, a child, or elderly and in decline, where the animal spirit is more mature and resolved at the exit of the pus, and the patient is likely to die, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be very careful with this chapter, and your puncture in which you puncture these abscesses, so that you remove the pus and consider whether the pus of the abscess is scarce or flat; then administer water of life or decoction of willow bark; if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the puncture are wide, wait until they converge before you proceed.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If a piece of the tendon or a part of it is removed from the abscess or hollowed out in that area, then cover it with old cloth or fabric made of dry cloth, as when you have treated wounds or sores, their moisture; and strengthen it within the third day; and proceed with that and cure it with the same thing that covers the wound until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If you have a flow of pus during the operation, then administer cold water and vinegar in those same cloths, and place that over the location of the flow of pus, covered with wet cloths.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the flow of pus persists, then cover it with bandages and apply the remedies and cures recommended in this book and in other places of our library.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the winter and the location of the abscess is near nerves, then cover it with powder and oil caustic, and place those over the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer, and the wounds are fleshy, then you should apply powders mixed with water and oil or vinegar and oil, and all this should be applied within the first day, as we have said, and then you should remove the abscess and clean that area and administer to him whatever is suitable for his cure within the first day.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses in general, but according to the method of distinction that I have already mentioned, each abscess should be treated differently according to its type.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the incision of abscesses that occur in the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck of the head, small abscesses, and especially those that contain glands that are their own; and their specialties are as follows.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And some of them are hard, and those that contain moisture similar to honey.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And some of them contain moisture similar to pollen, and those that are like themselves; and some are stony, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, you do not fear, as you should not make opposition to that archery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you should use an instrument in the shape of which you can approach it, which is called an introducer, as long as you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If that which contains is moisture, then divide that instrument in the section according to its length for surface section in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section of the line B until the line G. Then, when the moisture is evacuated, you should scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any of it for any cause, because too many wounds return, if there is any cause of it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian gum, if present, and otherwise in water and salt; and fill that place and leave it until another day, because that which is from that layer will corrode everything that is from it.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeat the second application of the Egyptian remedy thoroughly and carefully, if necessary, until you are confident that there is no cause for that rash; then cure the disease with the same remedy until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you insert this second remedy in this way:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a sharp cutting instrument in the shape of a crochet, and insert it between two lips of the section and scrape all its parts, and exert your skill in extracting that membrane which contains the pus.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your instrument causes discomfort, then do what I told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, treat the inflamed abscess with incision and cure according to what we have told you; and if you incise an inflamed abscess, it is better to be less, because it is less painful and less wet.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some people have such abscesses on their head which are always dry; the cause is that if you incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and atrobegui the abscess with a stone as hard, rough, white, which cannot be moistened, and if anyone is hit by that, it will cause harm to that person.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other head abscesses, this is not this chapter, as the abscesses that come to the heads of children and must be explained by the reasons of the golden hairs, but the section of all these should be a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the perforation of those from the lower part of them so that the matter of the sickness is not spread to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then apply treatment with that which is appropriate for that of healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofulous glands that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses occur in the neck and in the armpits and in the elbows; and some occur in the other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and those that are caused between them, and all scrofula of those is within their own tunica, and as with the nodes and abscess of the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the specific types of these scrofulous swellings are moles, some of which are bony, and some of which contain moisture, and some of which are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	And in that one which you see to be of good disposition in the Tactile test, the color of which is proper for the color of the gallbladder, and is magnified at all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the diaphragm, and is not indented, but rather you should scrape that one from the dry surface of the part above the part below the line of .G. within the line of .B., and score that of all parts, and extend two lips of the gallbladder to the onion, or to the cloves if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that small by small.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more caution that the vein or nerve is not scraped.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And the space should not be sharp, so that it does not adjust your hand to the scrape, or disturb the patient, and that you do not scrape what is not necessary to scrape; because if you were to scrape a vein or diaphragm and prevented you from performing your operation, then pause in the glass of three-pronged or other powders which keep the flux of pus, and clean the wound, and leave that which has paused the acuity of the abscess and is becoming softened and begins to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the tooth is removed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation before the hour is complete.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if there is any cause for the other small scrofula, then insert those and cleanse those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the neck of the large vein, cover it immediately that you do not insert that scrofula from its neck.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before covering, make sure it is flat and let it fall by itself when it is no longer harmful.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cotton that you have already immersed in Egyptian mud, and then care for that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you insert that scrofula entirely, cover it immediately that you adjust the two lips of the wound and press strongly so that there is no excess left.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess left due to the greatness of the scrofula, cover it immediately that you insert the neck of that, and remove that and administer sutures and that which is called.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And in the case of scrofula, which contains moisture, make a superficial incision where you see the location of its maturation, and pause the incision at the lowest part of the neck, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the incision, using similar instruments and techniques, to remove that which is left of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound has been cleaned, then treat the generated flesh within it until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the separation of the pus from the boil due to the inflammation.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients performed this separation in the abscess, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of their speech.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men who have swelling, be careful to avoid the extraction of the abscess, because it should not be done in such a way that all the veins and major blood vessels of the patient are cut.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	When there are boils in the mouth or throat or two tonsils, when the illness is not in the gums, cut away the section of epithelium to prevent the loss that is caused by suffocation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when you want to do that, cut away the epithelium in three circles of the epithelial circles, or four small sections for latitude in the area between two circles by quantity, which the section is in cipher, not on the cartilage, and this location is appropriate for section, where there is no meat and the sinews of the joint are soft.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is afraid, then extend the tongue of the throat upwards, and then cut the tongue until it reaches the gum, but avoid the sinews of the joint if there is any cause from those.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the cheek second, as we have recommended; and it is significant over the section of the gum for the flap that is of that and this is the cause that is of it and for the abscess of the tooth.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Let the wound be left open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Since the time when the piercing is feared has passed, add two strips of bandage to the wound, and leave it alone with the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then administer medicines that help heal the flesh before it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And as Albucasis says that the summary of the speech we have recommended is only to view how some of those abscesses have been opened up, and the patient has died, and his spirit has entered him, and they have incised the epiglottis so that he can breathe over the location of the wound for some time, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that commander, let the wound remain open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil of it lasts for three days; and therefore, after that commander, he should treat the wound in such a way, and cure it before it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And that which I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant puts a spoon in the patient's mouth and inserts a piece of lung cancer into it, and she was called to cure him, and then she blew air into her mouth as if it were the breath of the dead, and then she exposed the wound and then she sprinkled the salt that was on the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you should confess that there was no incision of vein or guided, and the wind was from the wound, and cure that within which the fire was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not harm the servant if he does not resist in the foot, and then return to the better disposition of his conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now tell you that in the section of the epididymis there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the incision on the abscess which occurs in the groin, and is called groin hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called groin hernia is an abscess of the second color of the body, and is caused by women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is of two kinds, either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one there is no need for cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is of two kinds, one of which is similar to large nodes, and the other kind is similar to abscess which is caused by artery blockage, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not attempt to make incisions with a knife unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that and investigate it, and if it resembles a gangrenous wound, and is not suspended by any of the veins, then incise it with those that are like the nodes, and extract that which contains the decayed flesh and pus; and if not, then examine the entire area, and apply a dressing where there is a chance of healing before it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the separation of the kinds of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes, there are various species that I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you should be aware of the difference between a node and an ulcer when making incisions.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, you say that an ulcer is characterized by heat, fever, and intense pain until the boiling of the superfluous matter ceases; and it is a putrefaction that stops the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	When there is no heat, fever, or pain, count the pulse of that lion which is in its proper place.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And if the second color of the body is like a cheese and is made in such a way that it is either greater or smaller, and there are two species, one being fat and containing moisture, and the colors of moisture are mottled, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you have reached the cure of the pulse, explain that one and inquire about the other at the beginning of the instrument which is called the stethoscope, as it will come to its form in the chapter which is appropriate for this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is useful for the inquiry of abscesses and all swellings, and that you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid place where you find the abscess, and you rotate its tips little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the pus.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then place your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and extract the stethoscope and consider what is in its traces.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the current moisture is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you scrape it off with a shallow cut as I have mentioned in the other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture in the imprints of the insertion, then you know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And you apply a dry cut with this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	as you have been taught, and suspend that one on the hook, and excoriate the codena from all parts to facilitate, and keep the skin or bag over that one and extract that pus from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and then you wait until that one does not remain for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If it remains for any reason, too much or too little, then the node returns according to the most.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some part of it remains small, then complete the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place your hand over that part that is the seat of the abscess carefully, and cure that one from the other treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is necessary to cut a large part of it, then you should take both lips of it and cure that wound with this ointment.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the pulse is on the opposite side, or not pulsatil, then you should cover and fill that place with three tinctures that are verdigris and leeches for two days or three until the pain subsides and the inflammation stops; and then return to cutting that which remains to be removed.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and puncture.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those that are inserted, and of three kinds, which are large, and of theirs is the largest, and of theirs is the smallest.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large inserter is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium inserter is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small inserter is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	It has feet of iron, of brass, and of rounded ends properly, in order to penetrate the instrument into the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experiencers, and they are named Albered, and one of them is called Beric.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three spices, one of which is great, magnificent, and precious.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great experiencer, his shape:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the magnificent experiencer, his shape:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the precious experiencer, his shape:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is suitable for those abscesses, exits, and fistulas, and boils, because they are among the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And there are made needles, large, lions, such as great golden needles, which are sewn with the sutures, and they are made of gold, or of iron, or of silver, And the best are when they are made of gold.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made of black lead, which are said to be suitable for those who have open fistulas in the cavity of which they are reflected, that they are reflected by their light on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three kinds of them, one long, and the other short, and the third medium-sized, according to the size of the fistula and its stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The shape of the large plug:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The shape of the small plug:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The shape of the tiny plug:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the needles are of special types, one of which is simple, and there are three kinds of them: large, medium-sized, and small.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And there are curved needles, and there are three kinds of them.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And there are needles with two curves, and there are three kinds of them.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And there are needles with three curves, and there are three kinds of them.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The shape of a large simple needle:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The shape of a small simple needle:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a medium-sized simple needle:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The shape of a large curved needle:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a snake, form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a little snake, form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a big snake with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a long snake with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a short snake with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a big snake with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a long snake with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a short snake with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of sharp scalpels that cut and scrape the nodes and abscesses, and they are of three kinds: one large, one long, and one short.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of a medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The edges of those that are made with a cut are sharp, and the other edges are not sharp, but rather they are used in such a way that it is done well in the excoriation of the nodes to avoid the risk of injury to a vein or nerve, and for these they are healed by the patient and at once peace of mind by the application of the excoriation of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the shapes of amulets, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you see.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of the large amulet is:
Forma de magda migier:	The shape of the medium amulet is:
Forma de magda pauc:	The shape of the small amulet is:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	These are the shapes of herbs and their similarities to rays, which are made into a tincture.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the external part, where the spotted ray is hidden and in that place, according to your will, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of rays, which are hidden among the mentioned ones for the puncture of abscesses and do not pierce the intestines, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the shapes of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of wings that are cut from the intestinal flux, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; their forms are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	These are the shapes of herbs like citrus, round and some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should have great knowledge of these special types of winds, thick and thin, so that for those afflicted with abscesses, you can quickly remove pus with speed in necessity, and later when the first symptoms appear, there is no medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use these winds to remove pus in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy areas, such as on the sides of the thighs and cushions, and on the sides of the arms, and breasts, and belly, and groins, and similar to their fleshy wounds.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some winds are made from other instruments similar to those used for lancing, according to this form; through which the pus is removed when lancet is performed, or you must insert a needle into a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some winds are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	About the treatment of men's breasts that are similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some women inflate the breasts of certain men to complement their sleep, and then they inflate the breasts, and they assemble the breasts of women, and they are remote, and they are apostates.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to the one who applies that, cut those same parts of the moon-shaped section according to this form, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then remove all the scab, and place the plaster of flesh medicament on it, and adjust the two lips of the plaster with its adhesive, and cure that one before it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines to the parts behind and is softened by its own size, as it often happens with women, then cut it in two at the higher part, into two sections similar to the shape of the moon, of which each contains the end of the other, within which the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line of .B. and the line of .G. And then remove the cavity that is between the two lips of the plaster, and scrape off the fatness, and administer that which we have said about the stitches and the powders that are necessary in the healing before it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the initial step of incising the affected area due to the patient's anxiety or excessive bleeding, then cover the wound with a plaster submerged in corrosive ointment and leave the area where the ointment is eating away at the flesh, and then care for that area so it can heal.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the puncturing of abscesses that come from the tip of the tongue.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from the tip of the tongue are of the type of scrofula, which is hard and contains a pus pocket.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And among those that contain moisture, those that contain moisture should be incised along the lunar line according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And as soon as all the contents of the abscess are evacuated, then close the wound on the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then keep the wound closed and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the abscess of the glands in the neck and the scrofula, as we have said in the section on scrofula, is present, then you should incise it as follows.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague is spread in such a way that it cannot be stopped, then you should apply the cautery as we have described in that section.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Section on the incision of abscesses that occur due to laceration or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When a laceration is torn, and the cord is consolidated over it, then abscesses and blisters occur due to inflammation and abscess caused by artery or vein: because when abscess is due to laceration, it is longer in the anterior part of the body; and when you press on the abscess, you feel a grating sound in that place.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And the one that is due to vein is located at the back of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Incision of this abscess is harmful, and especially in those that are behind the shoulder blades, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is a great wound, so you should avoid its treatment, and the one that is on the outside, or on the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Above the part that belongs to them due to inflammation of the orifice of the arkeria, cut through the dry section in the long; and then remove the section with scissors and remove the arkeria, and remove the tunics inside where it is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place the needle on that side and make it penetrate into the other side, and clean the arkeria with a double fold in two places, — which causes you to have seen in extraction of two arkerias which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then press the place between two limbs with a space inside where it is entirely in it, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which pus is generated inside where the limbs fall; and then cure that according to what is appropriate for that until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is through the section of the vein, then make sure that you have your hand on that which is at your possible distance from the abscess and the section, and then introduce the needle behind the place where you have had your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double fold inside where you extract that from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a thread according to what I told you in the limb of grape4 of two parts of two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that the thread might break, then insert the trustworthy needle into the entire abscess at the beginning of the first needle, and strengthen the four threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess at the middle part of it until you insert what is inside it, and leave that which is left outside.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand on the part that you have immersed in vinegar and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with calendula and tincture until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter L of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, when abscesses occur in the joints and veins, and similarly, abscesses occur in the nerves when they occur due to their impact or excessive work, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made in the most suitable place for the helper or the talon, or in any place where the joints are not affected.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And if it is an abscess that is large and similar in color to the other parts of the body, and it is located in the major joints, and when it is stretched with violence, the patient feels pain similar to that of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And if it is not an abscess attached to the front of the body, and for this reason it is left alone, and it is painful all over and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, for those who are in the joints, it is not recommended to be pierced with iron, because it would easily cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But if it is in the head or forehead, it should be left alone.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then do so with the forceps and remove that from the root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then hang it with an incision, and scrape that, and remove that; and place the bandage on it, and cure it inside so that it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the drying of an abscess that occurs in the mouth and also occurs in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	In men with masses in the abdomen and other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal by similarity to those that grow, for which the reason is subtle and the head of which is large; and already their lips are converted, and it is from those that are small, and it is from those that are very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in his belly there were two parts that were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white, of less reason.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already their lips were turned and they were deformed, and moisture ran from that time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I inserted those and again in one foot thirteen inches long and the other twelve inches long.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation at the insertion of theirs is that you consider this if the patient is humid, and the color of the abscess is white, moist, of subtle reason; then you insert it with a spatula, and keep it in your presence cauterizing it in the fire, because the masses that cause the drying of which are expelled by which is not sound; and if you find the unsound, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If the patient is very weak and afraid, first hold an iron; then take a recent plaster, strengthen that wrist, which we have mentioned; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust in the narrow part of the plaster; so do not stop strengthening the large and disfigured wrist until it is cut off and falls on its own.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the wrist is of large size, there may be some cause for fear and terror, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you cut off the part of it, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure it until it is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to cut off the wrist that is of dark color, with little sensation, and regularly shaped, because that is cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you will remember the remembrance of cancer.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the cure of an abdominal hernia.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	An abdominal hernia is caused by various reasons; either by fissures in the navel which is on the abdomen, and through which the intestine or hernia protrudes as it does in other ruptures; or by a weakness which allows blood vessels or arteries to protrude as it is called; or by tightness in the abdomen.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is caused by a fissure in the navel and protrusion of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the body; and the pain is sharp, and its appearance varies in different positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is caused by protrusion of the intestine, then its position is different from that of the body we have mentioned, with greater diversity, and as you press on it, it becomes hidden, and returns; and often it is in the same place, and is a sign of great difficulty to introduce it back, and causes great labor.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is caused by moisture, then the pain is sharp and does not disappear when you press on the abdomen, nor is it tightened or hardened.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is for suppuration, then apply these signs to the abscess to make it decline gradually.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is for flesh, then the abscess is large, heavy, and hard, and it remains in place for a certain amount of time.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is for moisture, then the touch of it is like a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to suppuration from an arc, or from a vein, or from moisture; therefore, it is prohibited from the treatment of it, because in that case there is fear and fear as you have been taught in the chapter where he has said about abscesses from an arc and from a vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then command the patient to hold their own hand, and be standing extended; and then apply a tent around the entire umbilicus, and command that it be held between your hands on the patient's belly, and then wrap the space around the umbilicus over the place where you have well placed the tent; and then extend the margin of the abscess to the parts above the ankle; and then apply a firm or soft bandage and the method of tying the bandage.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then approach the pus that has spread over the wound and insert the pointed instrument into that place and try to push the intestine back; and if you have not done this before or have not guarded it through the wound, then you extract the pus and push the intestine towards the parts inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the skin, then take that one and scrape off its excess parts.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is against your incision or vein, then circle that part and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them strongly into those two fields and push two needles around the wound in a crisscross manner, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and leave them inside the place where the flesh extends and falls down; or scrape off that part which is thin and can be removed, and then care for that wound which covers the mouth and heal it before it becomes infected.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the umbilical prominence is made of flesh and nothing else in it or due to moisture, then cover the abscess with what we have said and remove the pus or the moisture, which is found in it, and then care for that wound as we have advised.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 43.
De curacio de cranc.	About the treatment of the neck.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have said, in the division, of special cases of the neck and how to treat it with medicine, and that it is advisable to use iron in its treatment so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that the neck generates in the main and careful treatment of its cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancients said that some neck wounds are in places where it is possible to eradicate them, such as the neck which is on the breasts or on the cushion and similar to the members allocated to stretch all of that, and more so when they begin small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, do not apply yourself to it, as you will not be able to heal it for that or any other, nor have I seen another, nor that it has reached that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation is performed as we have said, by preceding with the patient and leaving them and purging them of black bile for some time, and then sewing it up if there is a clear manifestation of leakage.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation by placing them in a position suitable for the procedure, and then prop up their head with pillows; and then examine every part of the body thoroughly without any cause for concern about its reasons.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not stop it in the same way, and express the locations, and wipe away the blood completely with your hand or with an instrument that is as clean as possible from the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you have difficulty stopping heavy blood flow from a vein or an artery, then cauterize it while the bleeding is still occurring, and then care for that wound along with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 40.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure of hydropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the division, about the species of dropsy of water, and the symptoms of each species, of its cure with our medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by iron is only the species of althitas alone, and it is not approximated to the species of tempanists or yposarcha, because that is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this species of dropsy tempanistra with medicines and do not compare your treatment, then consider, why if the patient has already been weakened, or is another patient with another dropsy, such as in the chest or stomach and similar to those, then be careful not to treat it with iron, because there is fear of that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you see the patient of great virtue, and it is not another disease but dropsy alone, and not in children or old people, then the method of operation for this is that you lift the patient between your arms, and give him the exact position of his stomach with his hand, pressing the water to the part behind the penis, and then take a sponge of this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two sharp points long, from the sharp end with a spatula; but rather it should be in some small brevity step by step, so that in the operation you do not go through the intestine, and that you do not harm that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider whether the generation of hydrocyst is from the intestines, because it is said that you should make the section along the belly for the amount of three digits behind, on the right side of it above the peritoneum.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydrocyst is due to illness of the belly, then your section should be on the left side of the belly for three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the liver, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not make your section over the side on which you want to turn the patient, because the excesses would flow to that place uncleanly.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then perforate the instrument completely through the incision, and then insert it into that section, and raise your hand between the instrument and the sponge, and you excise that; and if the quantity of one nail or about.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then, approach the incision into where it reaches the space at the location of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then, extract that and insert an instrument of this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or of fine iron, with three prongs on each side; two on one side and one on the other; and its tip is sharpened according to the method of the pen, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the tip of the instrument, there is a ring, which when the instrument reaches the water, it is slightly raised over the instrument, and then evacuate the water in small quantities, because if you evacuate too much at once, the patient may die from the resolution of their spirit animal, or an accident may occur to them.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Do not evacuate too much from that, according to the quantity of the water and according to what means to you the patient's position and the goodness of their body.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and release the water that causes this, which is usually held back by the cord that you recommended to pierce through that second way.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the process on the other side if the patient tolerates it, and remove a small amount of water each time, and do this for several days, and be careful not to let too much water out.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	However, if you are worried about the patient and let out a large amount of water, then cure that with a burying in sand, and apply moist heat, and wait for a long time under the sun; and cure that with desiccant medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize the stomach, and the mouth and the throat as you have previously reported in water that precedes it.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	About the cure of children who are not born with perforated urinary tracts.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some children are born without a head from their mother's womb and the head of their placenta is not pierced (or is twisted or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, quickly perform the incision of the placenta as soon as it is born with a very thin knife according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then place a thin nail on the twisted part and tie it, and leave it for three days or for four days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, he should return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not place the nail, it is possible that the urine that passes over the area does not clean this wound.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	And that part where the twist is straight should be treated with a thin nail as we have said, for three days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	And those in which the twist is not in its place, the cause is that of those who are born without a head, because they cannot urinate to the parts below, until the placenta rises to the mother's hand above; and it is not at the generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and it is a malady due to the lack of water.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation is that the patient should be lying on their back, and then extend the head of the bone from the patient's left side with great extraction force, and insert the tip of the knife into the second incision of the skin, similar to the shape of a pen, or if you do not make any cuts, so that the patient's head resembles the shape of the bone and the blood flows into the second incision of the skin.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation of flushing the blood, four things can go wrong; and pause at that point where you cut the blood, and cure the wound before it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 66.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the whitish substance that occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis and corroded, black, and adherent to the prepuce of the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Four things can go wrong with this whitish substance in the penis and its foreskin.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one is malignant and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	No-malignant, a remedy that you suspend in an unguent and cut through the entire moon; and then place it on the part that is submerged in Egyptian ointment; and then apply that, cure with the ointment that enters and heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if it is malignant, of a black color, then apply a remedy that you administer with a pointed cautery at the beginning and end of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if it is malignant on the prepuce of the head of the penis not circumcised, and one part of the malignancy is in the foreskin and the other part is deformed, then apply a remedy that you remove the malignancy that is in the foreskin before it consolidates; and now cure that deformity, because when you cure that together with the foreskin, it is not guaranteed that it will not be three.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And now, if accidents have occurred in the testicles and the foreskin is black and curled, then apply a remedy that you cover all that which has already been stained and which is about to be corrupted or which has already been corrupted; and then apply linens over that with honey, which is beaten with the flour of scorched millet and three grains of salt and cinnamon.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure that one with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	However, if there is intestinal bleeding, then administer the following silver nitrate cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	where the curved cautery is applied at two positions simultaneously, to stop intestinal bleeding and to the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corrupted and destroyed completely in the hour, then place a catheter made of soft material into the urethra to allow the patient to urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in those where the foreskin is present, and on which circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to wound or abscess) then excoriate the area with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove those exquisitely, then excoriate the area around the head of the penis and the foreskin, and then cut the foreskin, which when thin, is easily punctured by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then carefully separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a fine needle, which is already soaked in water to prevent other infections from occurring.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then apply a styptic to stop the bleeding once it has been consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	About the cleaning of children and the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continence as with other plagues: nevertheless, since it is of our operation and our will, and it is properly in children, it is necessary to assign in that better operation and via pus the lesser peril to salvation.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of those free times, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experience, which is the reason why I have found the greater part of the artisans and barbers to use circumcision and cleaning with a razor and with a file; and they use a brush with hair and with an ingot.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already practiced all these methods and no better method has been found with forceps, with a loop, or a hook that can remove the foreskin underneath, where the foreskin is attached to two layers of skin, and the layer on top is removed, and for some people it is necessary to start from another incision and cause certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the method that is done with a scalpel, and it is digital, of which blacksmiths use, it is not safe to make the incision at the end of the male member, because it can easily enter into its cavity.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation, do not use a hook, as it can easily damage your surgical instruments.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The foreskin of the child is short by nature, and it can be stretched in such a way that it does not require circumcision, and I have seen such cases.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Avoid the circumcision that is done with forceps, with a loop, or a hook, as I have experienced it myself, because the forceps do not make a proportional incision, so the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; and therefore when you place your hand on the area, both sharpnesses are proportioned, and the incision is made in one go; and it is a compression of the foreskin that contains the foreskin of the penis in its entirety, and does not make any mistake.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first step in the operation is that you should make the child as comfortable as possible, especially if it is one of those who understands only a little, and do not make them lie on their side, but rather lie them down on their back, and let them enter the other day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then do everything possible to make that child happy in every way that receives their understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make that child as comfortable as possible, and not too close; and hide the forceps in your hand or behind their foot, so that the child does not see those or any other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on their back and blow into the mouth, and pull out whatever is inside the throat, and modify that which is added to it from deafness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the place where the wound is located with a double thread, and then place a small second bandage under that one, and then pull the end of the thread through the wound and insert it between the two bandages.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then elevate the head slightly and remove the cap of the bed; and then apply leeches little by little, which is better; and place powder on top of the powder and cover it with a cloth in which is spread a plaster of mustard mixed with honey and rose oil recently boiled; and apply that to the other side; and cure that with the cure until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	This is the shape of the forceps for extraction:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The two prongs should not be sharp and the other two should be sharp, so that the tip of the hook does not damage the intestine, and the length of the blades should be equal to the length of two fingers.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in extraction is that too much force is used to lift the entire or part of the intestine from its natural position.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, cover that with your hand from your hour and insert it into the abscess of the area and then insert it at the same level.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with tweezers and insert it there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If they have passed three days, and it is swollen and inflamed behind the ear, then let it out carefully to prevent the abscess from bursting, excoriate that area, and insert the second one that you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the ear, as it should not be exposed to that.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then heal that wound with the powders that we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is inserted too deeply and you cannot see it, then do not try to remove it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that wound when it has become healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retained urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or calcified scar tissue, or by a tumor or flesh, and similarly to those of which we have spoken about the methods of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see retention of it being due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then make sure the patient is lying on their back.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place the feet of that person on their own bed and extend their belly from the part below their back, and the patient should tighten their abdomen as much as possible towards the affected area.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is pressed to expel the stone from the parts behind, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if that does not dissolve the urine, and you see that the cause is very strong, then make sure to administer extraction of it with an instrument called a siringua, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and thin like a lion's tongue, with a small cannula of eagle's beak at the end of it, similar to a palm branch and a mig, to which there should be a thin cannula at the head of it.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way to extract the urine from that person is to take a thin, flexible instrument and tie it in the opening of the bladder with wool or cotton for good grip; then insert the ends of the instrument into the part behind the siringua, and if there are any excess causes of the wool, do not introduce it into the cannula with force, but gently. Then suck the urine from the siringua through the border and into a container of water.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And perform surgery on the patient over the table, and apply warm compresses to their body and wounds with olive oil and honey.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then introduce the catheter to facilitate its passage until it reaches the tip of the wound; and then bend the catheter upwards to the part of the abdomen; and then push the catheter into that, and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and then insert it into the patient's body, and then remove it if the patient is not in pain, otherwise leave it in place.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly pull out the catheter, as the urine flows into the cloth.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then remove the catheter and perform treatment for urine, using a catheter, do not stop doing that until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 99.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of bladder catheterization using the same instruments that are suitable for that.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or if it is constricted by a stone in that area, and you wish to drain fluids and medications from there, then use the instrument called the cystoscope, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but it has an opening on its outside, which is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three parts: two on one side, as needed.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning is a container in which that is contained, and if it reaches the second quantity that fills it, then it is added, until when any cause is removed from there, it is also removed, and when it is expelled, that water is also removed, and when it is emptied, the clampcedra is used, which is made of pitch in the battles of sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you wish to remove moisture from the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture, and draw that water which is contained in the parts above, because the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then introduce the catheter into the urethra after we have recommended it in the penis; and then apply moisture with that water, which moisture goes through the bladder, and also to the patient.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the catheter that is used when the bladder is catheterized, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, of which the tip is similar to a small pen, and then the shaft is thin.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder of motion, and place it in the moisture that you want to catheterize into the bladder, and then tie it tightly with a double string, and boil that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then introduce the tip of the catheter into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand on the bladder with the moisture that has already entered through the structure descending where the patient feels that the moisture has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not see the bladder, then take a stone of pumice and make it into a circle; and perforate it throughout its entire surface; and then introduce a strong needle through those tracks, as soon as it is turned; and then attach the circle where it was also attached, so that you can hold in that water that you want to use for the moisture, and squeeze and suck.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then approach that one with the instrument and do as you did with the bladder, and express the moisture from the bladder through your hand.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	About the extraction of a stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the previous section the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones that form in the kidneys and those that form in the bladder, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical operation and incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone that forms in the bladder itself is the one that gets stuck in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And you will hear about those that are exposed and abbreviated.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it is said that stones that form in the bladder mostly occur in children; and among their symptoms is that the urine that is excreted from the bladder is like water in its thinness, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels pain in their lower abdomen, and they are treated with ointments; and at that time, they feel pain in their lower back.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And this is the cure for children who have reached fourteen years of age; and it is difficult to treat the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In young people, it is caused by that which is between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that from which the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is few, it is opposite to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we reach the cure of that, cut along the beginning of that which we call the chrysalis, which removes all the fissure that is in his intestines; because that fissure sometimes prevents the passage of the stone due to its inspection.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then press the patient's feet and squeeze them tightly so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or it jumps out through some fissures.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that incision between your hands prepared, and the hand of the patient should be placed on his things, so that the bladder is completely made to lean down to the parts behind.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then approach that and all of that wound.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel a stone in the space, then quickly make an incision on it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not catch all of the stone from the left side, then place your left hand on the patient's right shoulder, if the patient is a child, or the right hand if they are an adult, and insert that into their buttocks.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And then approach the stone that is left behind by your hand.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually insert it into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that with your hand, and expel it through the parts of the wound where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant to extend his right hand over the parts above, and his left hand to remain on the abdomen, which is behind the thighs, in the part of the wound where the incision was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a thin, sharp knife of this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And split in that which is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle, but towards the left side of the cushion; and let the section be over that stone and the tool placed in the anus, and make a transverse section, so that the deformed section is wide and narrow according to the amount that the stone is possible to be in the tool, and not more, because it is very important that the tool placed in the anus is not forgotten and its deficiencies.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is a stone from which some angles and edges are, so that the issue of it is made difficult by that.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that which is like a lion's claw, round, and made of the same difficult issue.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is to that which has angles and edges, adjust in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not forgotten, then cover that you engage over that, or that you strain over that with a decent gesture of the end of which is like a razor, and does not escape from it; or that you insert behind it the subtle instrument of curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot reach that one, then slightly widen the wound a little, and if you want to stop bleeding, cut a strong thread with this three-cornered vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is larger than one, then at first push the hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it inside; and then insert a little more of that same thing; and similarly do if they are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, it is customarily known that you insert this great section, which causes one of two things to happen to the patient: either he dies or he becomes unable to urinate continuously, because the place is not completely solidified.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	If you administer the expulsion of it before it is completely forgotten, or if you insert it into the fracture of that one with the forceps before it is extracted in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with gauze of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that one.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	Pause over that cloth soaked in oil or rose oil and water-soaked, to prevent the abscess from being too painful.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then place the patient on their back on the couch, and do not let the bandage come off for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When those auscultations are over, apply hot water and oil to the affected area, and cure it with an ointment made of honey and a poisonous plant until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If in the wound there is an abscess that is painful and corrosive, and if it is similar to the one that occurs when the bladder is frozen, and if it is prohibited by the outlet (and this is known as the exit of the bladder through urine), then introduce a probe into the wound and extract that abscess, because it can cause the bladder to rot and decay.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with warm water and vinegar, and with all the ingredients that are suitable for its healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover all the hours of the patient's treatment, adjusting the medications placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the urethra, and it is stuck there, and urination is prohibited, then cure that which I previously recommended to reach the point where many troops are said to be successful in this treatment; and I have already done so, and now you should take a needle made of iron, of which this is its form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular shape, sharp, fixed in wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a thin, and place that urethra behind the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the urethra, perforating until the needle reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then rotate the needle in the small stone little by little, and you will perforate that opening until you make the other part penetrate; for urination is immediately released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then place your hand on that spot where the stone of the kidney is located, which is often called the bladder, and is pierced by urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	However, if this cure is not possible for some reason that prevents you from doing so, then place a true under the stone and another true above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then cut into the stone in that bladder between two grooves.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then remove the membrane and clean the wound with salt, which is done in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to place a true under the stone, but rather to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other true above should not be, because when the true is removed from the edge of the stone, the cord returns to its place and causes the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that reason, when you have removed the true above, you must raise the cord to the parts above, or return it to its original position and cause the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of the extraction of kidney stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Kidney stones in women are rarely caused.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	However, if one of those has a kidney stone, its treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited by many hands.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of theirs is that the strong woman gives birth.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who is very skilled in describing whether the doctor is casting spells, or has many husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not have a woman who is very skilled in this art, especially the operation of the abdomen.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the incision for kidney stones in women is longer than the location of the stone, so it is necessary to make an initial incision, and there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	However, if you need to do so, then you must take a very skilled woman who is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	However, if you are not in possession of that, then you must seek a wise and subtle man, or present a woman who has been skilled in the work of women, or a woman who has recently left this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then do that presently, and command him to do everything you tell him, from the examination of the stone until the beginning; this is because it is necessary to check if the woman is a virgin, then cover her vagina with something and remove the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If you find that, cut it off from there and then command him to scrape it off.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert something into the patient's vagina and examine the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compare it with something good.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	If you find that, then gradually clean the opening of the bladder from the parts behind it until it reaches the stone at the bottom of the cavity.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then scrape it off from the bottom of the cavity where the stone is located and place it in a container, and the stone should not remain attached to the scraped-off material.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the ray over that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the amount that you know how much the stone is cut from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	You should know that the types of stones are round: some of them are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have projections.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know how many types there are of that for what you mean by that which you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to remove the sand, adjust in the location of the three-pronged instrument and that from one hour until it is abscinded the sand, and then return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you prepare your tools from the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you will be helped by those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to remove the sand and know that the expulsion of the sand is from the groove that is incised, then you place powder on the location and loosen that with the dust and structure descending, and do not repeat that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for if you do, the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Since the intensity of the pain decreases over days and the wound heals, then return to your operation before the stone is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of incision for hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is not other than an accumulation of moisture in the white bag that contains the intestines and is called the peritoneum.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some of them are in the same abdominal wall that nature has prepared in the part of the intestine, before it becomes another intestine; and this is the septum between the peritoneum that we have said, and this is not other than a membrane.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to the weakening of the abdominal wall, which occurs in the intestines, so that this matter accumulates in them, and some occur due to a blow caused by an impact on the intestines.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has different colors, such as the color of it is declining to yellow or to blood, or red, or black, or white, and this is what is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the symptoms by which one can recognize this aggregation of pus: if it is in the white phlegm that we have called, then the abscess will gradually decline in length, like a figure of a cow, and appear as a genetic, because the humidity comes from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in its own pancreatic juice, then the abscess will gradually decline in parts, like a figure of a cow, and it is estimated by some to be another cow.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the cord of the testicles and the white phlegm, then it is necessary to cut it.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you extract the color of the humidity from the abscess and compare it with the color that precedes its form; and according to what is found in the footprints of the entromes, judge of that which is in it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when it comes to the cure of this patient, then command that they be bled if it is possible for you, and sometimes examine their chest.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And if it is necessary to place the patient in a supine position on their back for some reason, then place something underneath them.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And if you are to stand on the left side of the patient, command the assistant to follow on the right side of the patient, who then extends their hand at an angle of about one and a half feet to the groin and the part of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And if you take a wide spatula, cut open the groin from the middle down to the pubic bone.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And if you make the incision straight and equally distant from the line that goes down the groin, until it reaches the white bone that covers the pubic bone.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scrape that, observe it, and guard yourself so that you do not cut into it; your scraping should be like the one done by parting the skin gently and subtly scraping along the incision according to the amount possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And if you pierce the pubic bone with a wide hole, extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then, separate between two labias of the section of the joints, and extend the cautery to the parts above; and do not touch the cord that contains the genitals, and incise the cautery in that way that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And then, incise it to its full extent or in pieces, and more deeply, because if you do not examine the incision carefully, it is not safe that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the wound process from that part of its cord in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the cautery, return again, and then adjust the two labias of the cord of the genitals with a suture, and care for that as with the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if the wound becomes corrupted by another disease, then cover it with the ways that would support the suspensory, and extract the wound, and then care for that as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the water is added in two parts equal, then you know that two are hernias; therefore, incise that part according to what you have done in the other equally; and if it seems to be an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you wipe the wound, and introduce it into the sections of wool submerged in oil or rose oil; and place another piece of wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and expand it over two fingers and the belly button; and place over that cloths and powders, and tie those with a cloth that is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then take two cloths and fold them according to this pattern; and make the ends of the ones that are pressed from cloth or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the belt of the bandages, and one end of the extremity takes hold of the buttock inside the other, and the second holds the waist part, and two extremities over two thighs, and two more on two knees, and all the structure should be adjusted in the belt of the bandages.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of natural separation; and you should take a thin-bladed cautery and cut the scrotum of the testicles, and ignite it after we have recommended that it be discovered before the white cipher containing the water, and then you take a cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that cipher, and ignite it before all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the cipher with an incision, and excoriate with an incision, and excoriate with a thin-bladed cautery ignited; and insert that according to what is possible to you before you remove everything; and guard yourself from the heat that it does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting than natural separation, and better than the operation of castration.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you have resistance to the abscess at the time of separation or at the time of cauterization, or during the flow of blood, then cover that which you cure according to what resistance it causes to you by that, and the cure that is appropriate for it according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is weak and does not want to undergo the second operation due to its horror, then administer anesthesia as I recommended; and when you are certain that the hernia is incarcerated.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then make the patient lie on some elevated cushions, and then puncture the abscess in the lowest part of their chest, and pause the puncture according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And make sure the incision is wide enough for all the water to flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over that area and hold it there, so that the water continues to flow out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for that area until the infection is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If resistance is encountered during the drainage of that area at that time, then do not puncture it except for a small white cloth in the orifice of the wound, which causes resistance and prevents the outflow of water, and then place a pen or an instrument of that form in the opening; or adjust a small pressure on the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you will know that the water returns, and it is diluted with proper medicines or environmental factors; and as it is diluted, then according to that manual, the patient will pass their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	About incision over hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You will know that in the incision over this hernia, there is a risk of losing the major organs; therefore, it is necessary to remove it and save it from that danger.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation in that place and the characteristics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, say that the abscesses do not occur in those places where the intestines are contained and it is done for various reasons: either due to excessive acute pain, which is found in the intestines, or due to impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And its color is according to the color of the place, and it does not appear in the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And if the abscess has become hardened, of which the color is dark, and does not move to it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some wounds are made by the closing of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those that already exist, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	This is known as the spread of the abscess when it comes into contact with the thighs, and does not cover that which is called the touch.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	This is not spread by inflammation of veins, but for some reason it compresses the thighs called the touch.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this special section and on the other flesh; and you should insert the cord of the genetius, and approach the bone to the parts above, and remove that from the white cipher, and remove the suspenders of the vessels, and tie them, and insert the suspensors as you remove all the parts of the bone.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the bone is already attached to those flesh, then cover that which you remove and insert it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the intestine, or between them and the bladder, then you should remove all that adhesion and incise it at the beginning with a round opening.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the flesh is native to the place of the adhesion that is behind, then you should incise all of it and remove it as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose oil and vinegar; and cure it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the cure of hernia that is in the thighs.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The thigh is an abscess wrapped in a covering similar to a bursa caused by the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to perform any exercise or ambulation on the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, fear of that which precedes it is remembered.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, they call that operation in the second part that they perform first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And they say that you should lay the patient on a raised cushion; and then remove the suspensory ligaments of the testicles to the parts behind; and then take the spermatic cords and tie them to the base of the penis, which is exposed to the air; and have another assistant hold those, and extend them with great force.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert the sharp, narrow blade across the section of the vessels where the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then remove all the parts that we have mentioned in extraction of arkerias, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place a needle in which is faithful double, and tie that in the first of the places where we have caused bleeding, and tie the other one at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert those in the middle place by straight section according to the length of the body, and extract that which has been added from the moist and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the pain and the other pains in which you want to be born by causing the veins that do not carry blood from one of the two genes, because it is not bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if it happens that all the veins are affected, then cover them with a cloth or bandage to prevent the testicles from being removed or to cover the testicles because of the veins, so that they are deprived of all nutrition at the beginning of the veins, and that they be supported, or that it happens because it is not well for those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen from the sides of the miracle of the belly, so that the intestines of that rupture come out from any of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is of the abdomen or of excision of it, and these two species occur due to various causes: impact, or by sweat, or by shouting, or by raising something heavy, or by similar things.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	When the swelling from that, due to its extent, happens gradually over time and does not happen suddenly, it is an abscess that forms within the intestine because the intestine contains the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	When the swelling from that occurs due to the section of the intestine, where at the beginning it causes severe pain suddenly; and it is an abscess that appears different from the usual appearance, and it is caused by the intestine, and its cause is the pieces of the intestine.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Sometimes it is formed by the intestine itself, and it is called this internal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Sometimes it is formed by the intestine's movement, and sometimes it occurs in the intestine's hole, and it is held there, and it is caused by great pain of the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain and more so when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this illness, iron is used with fear, because it is believed that it should be avoided.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation for that is to command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with your hand at the parts of its cavity, and obey its return, and then place it on his back between your hands, and raise his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then place the cord that is the cord of the testicles to the parts above, and insert the cord of the testicles entirely through the length; and then place two needles in the second incision as needed to open the incision with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision is of such a quantity that it can be easily closed from that one.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then excise that tissue which is below the cord of the testicles, until it is completely exposed from each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then insert your finger into that place where the testicle is, in that place between the white tissue, which is below the cord of the wound, and between the tissue second, and remove that adhesion that is in the back part of the wound.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then approach the patient's scrotum to the divided parts, and apply the white cotton cloth on his left side, and raise the hand on the right side of the section; and command the assistant to extend the hand under him, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind after the solution is completed.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And cover the patient's thighs with the white cotton cloth so that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped in it.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause, then place it on the patient's abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle that is made of thick, strong thread, and insert it into the back of the white cloth, which is located at the scrotum, the section; and then insert the ends of the thread that extend to about four fingers, and place some padding on them in the shape of a cross; and tie that cloth which we have said is behind the scrotum with a strong knot.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the feet and tie them firmly with a strong bandage until all of the veins that inflame those areas are unable to transmit any cause for so that no abscess occurs afterward.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another bandage along the second line, far from the middle for three fingers; and leave these two bandages below the scrotum which is placed behind the testicles according to their size, and cut off all the remaining round part, and remove it from there.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut off the part behind the scrotum by section of the part which runs through and is clean as we have recommended in that place where we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer submerged wool in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the bandage which we have recommended (and some white bandages of the scrotum are cauterized, which we have said to place at the beginning of the wound to prevent blood flow, because those bandages sometimes occur); and leave the bandage until it falls off.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the patient's breathing is delayed, then apply a warm water enema and place your hand over the area where the second one will fall.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with the other cure for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of inflamed hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, no one has been found who has been burned by the treatment of it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first said that it should be done as we recommended in the hernia that is visible; which is that you should tie the veins near the section over that with the help of iron; and then dry in the middle place around the pus that forms there, until the veins fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the wound as we said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the dislocation that is made in the knees.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some people end up with a break in the knees as we said, and they point to the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And there is no known cause for hernias in the groin; and if there is, it is rare; and it returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	However, if the time is prolonged, a fissure is adjusted in the groin before the hernia returns to the groin; and this occurs due to the extension of the groin, which is as we have said, causing the groin to stretch, and then it becomes soft, and the area becomes inflamed and swells.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of this is with a pointed cautery as we have previously described.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some of these wounds are cured with iron according to this method: and that is by placing the patient on their back between your hands, and then removing the area of the inflamed swellings by cutting through the thickness according to the amount of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the groin white that is lifted up inside until it is discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the ray and place that on the area of the groin, and press that at the front of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then approach the two incisions at the end of the shinbone, and adjust one of those sutures to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then remove the end of the shinbone, and do not incise the shinbone from all sides, nor stretch the intestine, nor any other cause that you know about in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then care for that wound in the treatment of ulcers, and as you incise the fields, clean it and restore the ulcer before it is consolidated; because the shinbone contracts and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, as it is more likely to be beneficial.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the ligaments of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	The ligaments of the testicles are softened in old men because those tissues that are between them are softened, and the arrangement of it is changed.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary to use someone who has experience in the treatment of that which makes the patient lie on his back, and incise the entire ligament, which is softened over the natural ligament; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, apply three or four layers of softened wax at the beginning and make a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the stitches; and cure by treating the other wounds until they are healed and the wounds close.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration is forbidden in our law, but by cause it is allowed to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is that the physician knows about it when he is questioned about it, who can cure it; and the other reason is that we have had the necessity of castration of other animals for our benefit, such as donkeys, and bulls, and pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore it is said that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition or by incision and section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In that case, where it is done by attrition, the method of the operation is to make a cut on the animal's tail until the tendons and ligaments soften and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those parts with your hand inside while they are still resolved and do not appear from the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In castration done by incision and division, make sure you have the animal and take the cord of the testicles with your hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the suspensory ligaments, and incise on each side of one testicle with a cut through which two blood vessels pass.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise those that will be exposed after the scrotum is removed.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave any of those from the epididymis untouched, but cut the delicate one that is over the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better than the one done by attrition, because attrition leaves no cause for the testicles so that the animal does not desire gout.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then cure the pain until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the cure of hernias.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hernias in men occur in two ways: one is that it appears where the space between the testicles is located, in the area between two testicles, which has a groove where it is.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some of these are caused by urine that is in the space between the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a special case: and it is that the groove of the hernia above the pubic bone is similar to two testicles of a man, almost all of them are at the part of the fornix, which has the perineum of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three kinds: one from men, and one special kind for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you should insert those tissues adjusted inside until it escapes the source of that, and then cure those with the cure of other pains.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second species of men, where urine comes from the urethra of the testicles, there is no cure or operation in that place.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of lentil and meat that are particularly abundant in the causes of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Lentils are particularly suitable for natural causes, until it is fully stretched and made into a regular food; and some women are magnified in certain women as soon as it is spread with such things as in men and for the intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, you should have an excess of lentils with your hand or oil and scraped.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And not in the beginning, mainly in the beginning of the vagina, so that it does not become a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then cure that with the cure of the plague until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Raw meat is meat that has not been in the horrific of the mother until it fills that, and very much is used for the parts deformed second similar to coa (and for that first excuse that is called "malautia caudada"); therefore, you should scrape it with such things as lentils, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is not broken, or is a small fracture.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is caused by previous illness, and that is made from meat not well adjusted or from thin or thick salt.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made in the front of the thigh, or on its sides, or in the most prominent part of the thigh, or in the lowest part of the thigh, and it prevents movement and engagement and protrusion, and it strongly prevents menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made by regularly looking at the menstrual cycle, if the swelling is apparent, then you should apply it to the thighs or the knee. However, if it is not apparent, then you should wrap it around those parts or the knee.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	However, if the swelling is from thin salt, and it is applied to the two lower lips, then you should cover and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And place your hand over both of his lips, and then gently press the two thumbs against the upper jaw.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her legs spread apart, and then gently extend both lips with force until the subtle phallus is broken and the foreskin is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and pour oil into it and place that on the wound, and stitch the man with a needle to prevent the wound from becoming consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the phallus is large and thick, then you should stitch it with a wide or thick needle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the foreskin is made of flesh, then suspend it with a thread and stitch it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And give him the medicines that stop bleeding from wounds due to bites, such as acacia, and blood, and sulfur, adjusted with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide-bore catheter to prevent the wound from becoming consolidated too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it for several days and administer some of its oil.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then let the other treatment of consolidation be applied until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes certain events occur in the main native land of other animals, and later cover them according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is for abscesses in the main native land, then do not make any contradiction against iron in any method.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the treatment of emorroids, and tail, and red bot fly that occurs in the part of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Emorroids are appreciated from the openings of swollen veins within which blood flows continuously; and since emorroids are also formed, they are like that.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of those species and their symptoms, and to say whether those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore say that emorroids and their symptoms when they are in the main native land and do not appear to the senses, then in those do not make any treatment with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	May those who are on the upper parts of the body, where the cat feels sensation, be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And cover the flesh with a mixture of mild soap and a rough cloth, and scrape those parts with the razor.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And sprinkle powder on those parts from one of the scissible powders, such as mustard and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And soak their feet in cold water for an hour, and place that in fresh water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of pus persists, then make that poultice from a mixture of barley, salt, and similar substances.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And take flour of orrisroot and mix it with honey and vinegar to make a poultice over the wound.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the pus is drained, it is good; otherwise, apply two bandages and make incisions at the breasts for scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take wool and soak it in the juice of celery or in the juice of garlic or in the juice of guarravier and add vinegar, and apply it to the affected area; and cure the area with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May you ask for the thing that is of rough regard, covering it with this that you have prepared in the same way as I said before.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure the one who is inside so that they are healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	About the puncture of an accidental wound in the eye.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Special notes about accidental abscesses in the eye, including chancroid and anthrax, ulcers, adhubelat (adhuesion), erpetromens (erpetic urethritis), fistulas, emorroyas (emorrhoids), raguarrias (ragweed), and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these diseases and their specialties and symptoms, and their cures in the previous division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And cover what I say in this treatise about abscess cautery, which is the one that occurs in the eye when it is among the abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know how the operation of it is done with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp with percussion and flexion and fever, and sometimes it becomes swollen and if it catches on that sensation, then do not make a puncture in it, and cure it with that which helps to stop the maturation inside before the acuity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then, place the woman on a bed with two mattresses; and lie down beside her and adjust her feet to the part of the bed closest to the stomach, and her thighs should be spread, and her breasts should be covered with a cloth suitable for that.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then, the midwife should follow the doctor and administer the instrument that is inserted into the major opening, the shape of which will be discussed in those causes that will be mentioned later.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, you should be on your knees at the major opening of the woman's body, and that which enters into the major opening should not be more than the size of the major opening and should not harm the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the major opening, then you should place powders on the surface of the major opening to prevent the instrument from entering completely.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And then, place the spindle that is on top of the instrument of the doctor and have the administrator hold the instrument and rotate the spindle until it is inserted into the major opening.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excretion appears, and it is touched by the hand and the lion's tongue, and it is moistened, then you should separate that devil's head from the patient's body with a broad-bladed knife.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then place a cotton swab soaked in rose-scented oil or green oil in it, and place the calyx in the section of the main vein.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place a clean cloth soaked in water in which wormwood has been built on the patient's back and over the peritoneum.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And after two days, apply the appropriate poultice that is suitable for that wound until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some bandages are washed the back and the wound with vinegar and honey, and then apply water in which raspberry or long aristology has been built, and then return to the poultice.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in the back bandaged, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, having care for that which we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to best treat ectopic pregnancies when they occur in an unnatural position.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary for the midwife to know the natural position of the fetus from her experience, and when you feel the woman pushing at the parts behind and desire to smell the air, and on that side is the ectopic pregnancy, and quickly feel the uterus, then you will know that this part is the second natural position, and the uterus is over its own head, and the second uterus is suspended or hanging from the umbilicus.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you feel those signs, then you should compress the abdomen of the woman so that the fetus can slightly move forward, and when it moves over its own head, the second uterus is exposed, and these superfluities are removed in a good manner.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	If that part is not natural and unusable, because when the fetus is exposed over its own feet and the woman's back is facing forward, and the woman's hand is on her foot, or on her side, or the fetus is exposed over her head, and it is greatly converted over its own collarbone, and similar to the unnatural figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	When necessary cause is to the woman who is wise and subtle in all those causes, and she keeps from error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And she shows all the figure of those, and what engine is in those so that it is significant for that and stands on that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When it is done, it is applied on her own head for natural dryness, and that is very strong on the woman and is made at that difficult part, and sometimes the power of it has already been weakened, then do that sweat, or what women had of it, and evaporate the concoction from it with fenugreek coyt and oil of mustard.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the midwife between her own spread legs and tear that secondina, or dry it with her finger in which she puts that which is in it of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly until the child comes out.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not come out, then do that the woman is covered with a mixture of mud and a mixture of fenugreek and mustard powder.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then approach the patient, approach the crucifix, so that they are comfortable and make them do that snoring sound; and hold their mouth and nose for an hour, so that they fall asleep quickly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the patient's mouth is open at the beginning, then gradually reduce those with that facility little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if they do not obey the instrument, then place a cloth over their face, lift their feet up, and gradually lower the cloth to the ground; and the cloth should be held so that it does not fall due to the shaking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the teeth are not broken and the patient dies, then insert those and remove the remnants of the patient's body or place the cloth over their mouth and remove that equality, because that will make them sleep quickly.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the position of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the patient lies on their feet, then gradually push those upwards, and gradually turn the patient small, and gradually make them equal, and gradually take one of their feet and extend them little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When they are lying down between the thighs, then command them to express themselves, and make that extraction with a condition, which will be effective if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if that thing we have recommended does not work, then gradually return the small one back into the second natural figure, which will be effective in a short time.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is completely prohibited to use that thing we have recommended, then take some mustard powder and dissolved gum, and grind it all in the mortar for good percussion, and apply that mixture to the lower part of the woman's belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that cake in cold water, until it reaches the desired consistency.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts that were removed from them are softened, then apply the sublimation of mint and sub-pause that to it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sublimation has been applied for an hour, then make that mixture on a plate, and apply that extraction and remove the mouth of it, and lift it from that, and press the lower part of the woman's belly against it, which will be effective soon.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Eyssiment of the feet on their sides and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the patient is lying in this position, gradually extend their hands; place your hand on their neck, and their feet should be lowered to the ground, and those should be placed on the side, and complete their hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And gradually place on their stomach, and gradually remove that which is placed under their feet from the bed before it is prepared in the part where it was placed.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the patient is not ready, take their feet and move them with great force, and gradually place that which is on their hypochondriacs little by little until the patient can raise their arms.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And gradually place their hands and equalize the patient little by little, and command the woman to express herself until the patient is ready.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Eyssiment of the patient lying laterally with one of their hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	If possible, gradually reduce the bowels of the patient, but if you cannot reduce them, then raise your hand and do that.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if the patient cannot move, then perform the Jazzer on the light, and shake the cushions under him vigorously, and administer ointments that you have and recommend for bruises.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the child has come, then perform that procedure on the hearth, and study the reduction of the womb, and equalize the figure of the woman according to nature, and make her vomit and command her to know whether she has passed the afterbirth.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The child is on its back, with its hands expanded and the surface of its foot facing downwards at a distance of two fingers from its mother's face.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife should hold the woman's hand and gradually turn that little one by little, and equalize it according to ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And as it is and how much it is equalized, then pause over the wound of which you have recommended oil and ointments.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And as soon as the woman has given birth to the child, then perform that procedure on the hearth, and command her to be inclined over her right side, and as soon as she is comfortable, make her vomit again.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the prepared fetus on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the second finger of the right hand is inserted into the vagina in this manner, consider it, and then insert the second finger under the nail to remove the moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then insert it into the belly button to prevent it from being retained and decaying.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then gently push the fetus into the lower parts until you reach the second rib, and tell the woman to make some moans, and if the man is not yet ready, God willing.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You should know that the cries of twins or many fetuses are not natural, and sometimes they can be deceitful and cause trouble; but this is a natural cause, and not a living one.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, even if they are multiplied, one by one, and separate them by cipher, distinguishing those within the umbilical cord of each of those, and some moans are not ready as it is a fetus that is naturally alive, and its existence is accompanied by some moans that are not audible as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If it is difficult to remove the child from their mother and they reach the point where we have spoken of the unnatural figures, then you cure them as we have reported.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the midwife is skilled and performs actions that facilitate and expedite, and delay, and if she has engineering skills according to the figure as it is prepared by the engineer, leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some pregnancies are formed in the womb, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and it is necessary to verify that a woman aborts six times, and another all of them, which cause is made for the glory of the saints.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all such knowledge that should be in the science of the midwife, which is very useful for that appearance similar to that, and therefore pauses at that which she knows.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of extracting the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you are treating a dead fetus that we have mentioned in the division of medicine and it is not deformed, and you find it suitable to use forceps, then consider whether the woman's health is of good virtue and not affected by any accidents for which she is feared to be lost.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be placed on her left side, with her head raised and her thighs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the assistant should hold her on both sides or be tied on her left side to prevent the uterus from extending and causing difficulty in extracting the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the mouth of the uterus with oil and a mixture of althea, fenugreek, and semen of lily.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife should place her hand on those oils and mixtures, and then insert her hand into the uterus to facilitate its opening, and then place her hand over the area where the fingers are in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And in the appropriate places: then consider if the patient is prepared to have the needle sent over his head, and then you put the needles in his neck, or on his back, or in his mouth, or in his palate, or under his beard, or on his breastbone, or on the appropriate places of his ribs, or on his hypochondriacs.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the application is on his feet, then in the arch of his foot, or in the middle of his ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And you should hold the needle with your hand straight, and bend the curve of his body in that place between the fingers of your other hand, and insert your hand to facilitate and put the needle in any of those places until it reaches the cause of the pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and hold another needle in the appropriate position of his body, or a third if necessary, so that it is attracted equally, and not stretched according to its straightness only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it should be applied to all parts, so that the application of his body is pleasant as it is done in teeth for its eradication.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And cover that area with a warm cloth; if any part of it is held back, then apply the midwife's ointment and insert those experiments and rotate those that are held back.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then move your fingers into the space that is most open; and make an incision so that the entire fetus is removed.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is on the other side, and it is not possible to reduce it by the pressure of the intestine, then cover that area with a cloth; and remove it so that everything is removed, and incise it in the joint of the hand or in the cavity.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And make an incision in the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or an incision is made in the cavity and it is in the top of the water adjustment, then insert between those spines spinous and cut the head and remove the water, or use an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will come from the shapes of the other instruments in the capital which is appropriate to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, if the fetus is very large by nature: and then you should insert that hook into the uterus, or take hold of it with the forceps as we have said; and then remove it from the bones.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is protruding and is compressed by the ribs, then it should be cut through where the humidity that is in the chest is collected.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated, nor overly large, then you should insert the head as soon as possible according to your ability.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the other side of the belly is abscessed or is in the hydrocele, then you should pierce it where the humidity that is in it flows.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is above the feet, then the foot of the mother is raised and the direction of the fetus to the mouth of the womb is reversed.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is compressed by the belly and chest, then you should remove that hook which has covered your hand, and pierce the belly and chest where that humidity flows.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are still intact and the head returns, then the midwife should enter her hand on the right side; but if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, then the midwife should introduce her hand into the position of the chin, and surround the head, and push that hand into the mouth of the mother, and then insert one or two fingers.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed by an abscess that has affected the child, then do not force it over the abscess; before that, cover it and administer an infusion of heavy humid causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the child is on its left side, then if possible, it should be turned over: and that should be administered which we have said in the living fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be incised in the feet, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And do not leave any cause of decay in the second stage.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed all your operations, then administer the medication we mentioned for treating the abscesses that occur in the major joints.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flow of pus, then apply stifling waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in the belly of whom was made dead, and then another incision was made, and then the dead fetus was removed.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	An abscess occurred in his abdomen; and when it was inflated inside, he began to move his arm.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called for his care, and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not consolidate.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed some strong-adhesive plaster on him for several reasons, and after a while, I removed one bone, and after several days, I removed another bone; and I was very surprised because there were no bones in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then apply heat to the affected area, and extract from it a small amount of bones, the female existing in her own marrow, which has been prepared in such a manner for a long time, correcting with a small amount of salt.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And do not be afraid to do so, as it is known and helpful for the doctor who is skilled in this art for healing purposes.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of a spoon in which the handle is placed:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a forceps in which the handles are placed, to which the handles are attached, with two spoons at both ends of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this instrument should be more subtle than a constrictor, and should be made of silver or gold.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the thickness of each rod should be two inches and the margin of which is one inch; and the length of each is a palm and a little more; and at the middle of the two rods there are two adjustments of that metal rod, which are already fixed, of which the length is the greatest of one palm and a little more, and the width of which is two inches, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are placed in the mouth of the main character to facilitate the insertion of those when you turn the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form of that more subtle and less visible:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made from a stick of wood or second-hand iron, depending on the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the end of this addition, there should be sometimes at both ends, and the length of these additions is one span, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to insert those into the main character, then you should make a cushion over her head, with her feet hanging down, and place that which is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then place your hand over the instrument that is similar to forceps, according to the amount you want of the appreciation of the main character's mouth to enter when the midwife makes it.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of virtue which the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impelling that is pushed by the one who is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of an ointment that contains the main ingredient called le cap gran
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is shaped like a pair of forceps at the end, sometimes, and sometimes long forceps are made according to this form, sometimes with a pointed end like a sharp instrument that is cut and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of an ointment containing few ingredients:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of an ointment with a spike:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of an ointment with two spikes:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps with a pointed end like a sharp instrument that contains the main ingredient of the flesh:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula with two ends, where the main ingredient is removed:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two long spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercised, and when more of that kind are multiplied and their species prepared by the artists, it is easier for their operation and more suitable for the people according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should always have those instruments ready, because the need for them is not excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the second tooth.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second tooth is held, command the patient to hold their tongue, and do so with a strong hand on their mouth and nose, and if it is deformed and does not fit, then it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	Otherwise, take a lump of earth and pierce it with a sharp object and place it in the area where the molar teeth are located, along with calamint, rude herbs, anet, camomile, Arabic spices, cassia wood, and saint-john's-wort.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the lump, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a cannula of the cannon in the mouth of the patient, and hold that until the vapor comes to the cavity of the tooth.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then do so with the strong hand as we have said, and the second tooth will be easily extracted at that speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this care is approaching and has not been performed, then command the matron to place her left hand in warm oil or in a mixture of aloe, and then enter it into the wound and massage it, and when she finds the second one, then take it and extend it to the first one, and if it is attached at the beginning of the main vein, then enter her second hand after we have recommended, and when she finds the second one, gradually remove it step by step according to so that the main vein does not catch it violently.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	It is necessary that the cover be moved to the right and left sides for convenience.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust it to the amount of attraction, so that it will obey and avoid adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the main vein is constricted, we have already recommended the care of tracheostomy and the medication of the oil with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If all the causes that we have recommended are not forgotten, then remember to not apply it on that which is inside of it to the mouth of the main vein, but rather place that which is in the belly of the woman, and then christen it with the oil and tetrafarmacon; because that will cause it to rot within a few days and dissolve and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When the patient is unconscious, raise their head and stomach, and this relieves the patient; then administer appropriate sub-fumigations and medications for that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Even ancient doctors have used sub-fumigation with nitre and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of instrument by which the woman is sub-fumigated helps to retain menstruation and prevent miscarriage:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of copper or iron.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the thin end should be placed in the fire and the wide end over the flame, and the sub-fumigation should be done over the coals of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that one while that sub-fumigation is consumed and repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the cure of the unpunctured child's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When newborn children and their anuses are not punctured, which are already thin and swollen.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then let the midwife prick that thin part with her needle; otherwise, prick that space quickly and make sure it does not touch the skin.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place your hand over that wool soaked in wine and oil; and cure that wound by applying a poultice that is not too hot.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	However, if you fear that it may be too hot, then place a catheter in the rectum for a few days, and remove it when the child is ready to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	However, if the heat has been applied to the anus for the consolidation of a wound or abscess; then make sure that this consolidation is not cut, and apply the same remedy as before with the poultice and the plaster.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that have occurred previously.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the abdomen and are more numerous, those that occur near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	And if it is a fistula or a fistula.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And if that swelling is ancient and comes from the moisture of a white or thin pus, and some of these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating parts are known by that which is used for the egress and for ventilation; and some use the patient for egress, and it often comes from those who are strong.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas are guarded in the penetrating space into the bladder, and into the meat of the penis; and some of those penetrating parts enter the joint of the thigh and into the back of the thigh.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in which the penetrating fistula is known to enter into the anus and not to penetrate, you place your finger in the anus, and insert a thin iron or iron rod into the fistula when it is not turgidity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is turgidity in that place, then insert the thin iron or iron rod into the tent until you feel the tent or the hair on your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all or if there is any cause of excretion or worms or turgidity, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then treat it accordingly.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meatus of the urethra, then the meaning of this is that it is urine from that place and prohibition of it so that that location be strengthened by medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and there is pain in the circuit, then it is necessary to insert it here if there is not turgescence into the bone, and pain in the circuit of the part; and that from it there is no immediate relief; and that it does not work in that medicine, nor is it strengthened by ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas that do not cure completely, and the cure of those is laborious and long, the work of many physicians upon which they are stopped.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	If it does not penetrate and is not ancient, cure by iron is recommended according to what you advise, and that which has already been tried and is successful.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands above his shoulders and raises his thighs into them, the cushions are inclined towards the belly of the patient, and then insert a probe of plumbum, or of eram if there is turgescence in the fistula, until you know where the probe enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If you feel that the patient has a fever around the abdomen, then enter your finger into the abdomen.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the tenderness in your finger that has been inserted into the abdomen, or another sign between your finger and the patient's body, then you can be certain that it is penetrating; and therefore do not treat in that area, as it is not a healing sign, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, it is said that this is a sign of healing in some people who are sick with fever.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medication for which it is hoped to be greatly effective in that case, you should ignite a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously described, and introduce that fire into the fistula until it reaches around the abdomen; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those tissues attached to the fistula have been burned, which resemble a quill of a feather.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then care for those wounds covered with bandages until all those attached tissues have been scarred, and then care for those wounds with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, then it will not be healed at any time by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the tent enters, and does not penetrate into the anus, which is in the buttocks, and between that and the tent is a thin membrane of flesh or skin, and if the fistula is in that place, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and see if the tent dries, and if it is inside the fistula when the drying reaches the place where the end of the tent is, and through the tent it is released and cauterized.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Then clean those fistulas that are assembled like a pen quill and do not have any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	However, if pus flows between you and your operation when you have cleaned those parts, then milk that is and of the other instrument is cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine, because a pointed cautery adjusts good doses: it is adhered to those parts adjusted, and abscission of the pus due to the exsiccation of the humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then carefully remove the cloths or bandages that are wrapped around the affected area until the place where the bone is located, and then carefully remove the hard, raw flesh that has generated and solidified.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these remedies have the properties of astringency and dryness; when it is restored, it is healed and there is no risk of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	However, if the fistula has already extended into the anus and is prolonged to the surface of the chest, then insert the finger into the anus and examine that area.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if the tent is inserted and there is a veil of skin or flesh, and it is prepared for penetration, then it is not an operation in that area but rather a second way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause of this is to administer it in that area in one of three ways: either by cauterizing that which we have said; or by drying out that area so that you can easily insert the instruments and the cure proposed; and do not process any motive for dryness so that you do not pierce the lacert containing the wound, and that any accident occurs on the patient's will; and then carefully remove that which we have said that is very useful for healing; or by elongating that veil and moistening that pus that dries out that area so that it can be easily crusted; and then force yourself to restore the entire area of dryness, and if the orifice does not become consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the anus, and is more likely to remain for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, the fistula is finished according to this method: when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side of the buttocks around the surface of the anus and on the edge of the buttocks, then take a perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the wound in this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert it into that fold of skin or around those; and then insert the tent into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates the edge of the buttocks nearby, then you extract the skin from that fold which you introduce your own finger into the anus; and extract the end of the skin and adjust both ends, and let it rest for a day or two, and when more skin is inserted into the flesh, remove those which are between two ends of the skin and which can be removed.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then care for the wound until it is healed and cured.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifices of the fistula do not penetrate, then make them penetrate in some way that is suitable for you, but ensure that it is not too sharp to harm the skin; and then apply a suitable remedy to heal it.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spina that is used to puncture the fistula: its curvature is sharp on one side and flat on the other, so that it does not harm unnecessary parts, as sometimes necessary.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Suturing of hernias in which there is a rupture at the beginning of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hernias can occur in two ways, either between the buttocks like this, or they can be similar to a bag of feces.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those, there are small and large ones, and that the rupture occurs from them immediately and is one, and its causes, and its location on the buttocks, and in their extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that occur on the buttocks due to lack of moisture, from which there is a yellowish discharge or a small rupture with continuous exudate, and its color depends on the cause.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is within the belly is to command the patient to lie down and to expel what is inside until the belly is empty and the bowels appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you sit and hold the patient's arms or whatever you have with your hand, and then cut those parts of their body.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the arms are not held in place by their moisture and softness of those parts, then take those parts with cloth or with a cotton swab or with a piece of woolen cloth, and remove those parts with your fingers, and then cut those parts and sprinkle some powdered chalk at the beginning, so that they are in place as a cauterizer; or cauterize those parts according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those parts with the other cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the belly does not obey the exit, then Christianize the patient by marking them with a small bite mark, and then wash them with that water which is in the belly and which helps to facilitate the exit more when the patient is expelled.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the swollen parts deform the buttocks, the cause is usually excessive fluid, and you should press those parts with your nail or with an auger, scrape them, and then cure them with what we have said before they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever comes first should administer the second suture in this manner: take a needle and insert it into the swollen part, and then extract the swollen parts from the upper parts, and let the needle penetrate into the other part, and wrap the two extracted parts on the side of the needle, and longitudinally; and strongly tie the swollen part to the structure, and then remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and leave one of them untouched, so that the excess fluid from that one can drain out.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the buttocks; and place that on the wound and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that area alone; and when it is healed, cure those wounds with ointment or other medication until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Accidents caused by dryness of the skin or by constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if those remedies do not work in that medicine, then apply those to the point of the needle or your nail into which they have been made wet and hold them over those scales of pus that are above, which prevents those from consolidation; and then cure those that have consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And then apply those to very strong pus that the first one into which it is healed and excoriated; and then cure those that have been healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of ulcers, it is clear.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that ulcers, it is clear, and not if not red around the body like a claviel, and it is made throughout the body and especially in the parts below the feet and those, and it is caused by those pains of the body.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then cut that which is inside the nail circle, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its root; and then care for that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the second one that precedes in its capital.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Warts are small, hard, rounded fistulas on the surface of the body, and many veins come out of them in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And care for that is that you extend and cut it, or that you remove it with forceps or tweezers.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already the ones that are turned and not turned are held by the instrument that I will say.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	And the ant is a small, furry or large fistula on the surface of the body, going through one in the prone position, and when it comes to that place, it is centipede-like in the same way as an ant bite, and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment of this is that you take a sharp needle made of iron or copper, and it should be strong, and place it on the anthill where it contains the circle of the needle's parts; and then rotate your hand with the needle inside the circle, and place it on the flesh, and remove the ant from its nest.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a needle made of bone or iron in this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part of the needle above the canula should be thin, sharp, and not pierced, wrapped with something that is slippery on the surface where it is applied to the patient's skin and the rotation of which causes it to slide.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the ant according to what is said in the cauterization of althaea in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are used to give crucifixion.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some nails are made of silver or lead or melted or malleable; and some are made of those instruments small and large according to those that are administered, because the one that is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and the crucifixions of those who have foul or painful wounds should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of the Christ child great and small:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the catheter of him above in which is the bag should be wide according to this manner; and at the distance where the bag is attached, it should be like this with sometimes.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the purse left, which is inserted in the buttocks, should be sharp (if it is not opened) like a lion, behind a subtlety; and on one side of the two slits, and on the other side a slit, and the width of the slit according to the size of the rays and the largest a little.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which were placed the medicines of the bladder of an animal or of sheep wool, and the reason for it is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with sharp needles like this; and if the space between the slits is the largest of the said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And insert into those slits strong sharp needles of which the size is of the said fields, or around those; and adjust that bag; and when the bag is placed in it, it should be straight in the head of the Christ child between two different strong constraints, and then cristize that one: May the quality of cristizing that one is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be scalded according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and guard yourself that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then the patient should be placed in a supine position on their back, and their thighs raised and supported by a pillow or blanket; and then a cloth soaked in oil or albumen of egg or fenugreek or similar substance is inserted into the anus to facilitate evacuation, and the nurse takes the basin and expresses the contents until it is all evacuated from the intestine; and then the patient is turned onto their side.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the remedy does not work, hold it for as long as possible; and if the patient sleeps throughout the night, it is better to delay the treatment until morning.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you cleanse the patient in the morning with an enema and the remedy, then repeat the cautery until they are healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are morbid or abscesses in the anus, then use a thin and sharp enema, from among the enemas that children are accustomed to using.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of plagues
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	It has already been said in the division of the treatment of plagues that such things were suitable for free people, and thus the treatment of those who are not free is said in this way according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that the plagues are diverse according to what they are made of and where they occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which certain plagues are made include being caused by a pebble, or an incision with a spit or a dagger, or a blow from a lance, or a stick, or a sword, or similar to those of other causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the plagues that are in the parts of the body include those that catch on the head, or neck, or chest, or abdomen, or thigh, and similar to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I will recount the treatment of some plagues because of that reasoning and rule over other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, as the memory of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, it is said that when a simple head plague occurs and is not a fracture, if it is due to a stone or something similar, and has only been treated with water for a long time and is large and causes great concern about the patient possibly developing an abscess, then you should immediately apply a lancet to the cephalic vein, and do not delay; and remove as much of it as possible, depending on the amount of its virtue, unless some cause prohibits bleeding, especially if the stone that is left from the plague is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if bleeding is the opposite of the affected part, then keep the patient away from eating and drinking coarse foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is some cause that prohibits minor action, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or fish.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And if an abscess forms on the plague, apply a poultice of roasted bread or some other stinging substance.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are sure of the abscess, then pause over the wound, if it is recent and its pus and air have not changed to powder, then apply a small amount of the following remedy.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed to pus, then pause over the wound with some healing ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or extends into spaces and is not closed by lips, then adjust those with sutures according to what I will recommend for their sutures.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound has already been exposed to the bone and flesh, and is not retained by a small suspensor, then insert that and care for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to eat foods in which there is grease: caps and similar things until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if there is putrefaction in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then insert all that rottenness and remove it, and care for that.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these areas there is an artery or vein from which unclean blood can flow, and it is not severed by medicine, then examine the artery, and if you find it unsevered, then incise it with a needle or thread; and if necessity causes that what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize where the unclean blood is being severed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these areas are simple and small, then the cause of their simplicity is likely to be leprosy; in any case, powder this powder over those areas, which will consolidate them so that air does not move them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is as follows: take one part of broken olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished charcoal; grind all of this into a fine powder, and fill the area, and compress it with a good compression so that it adheres to the area and is coagulated by the unclean blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then compress it above with the powders and let it rest there, and do not remove it until it is completely healed, because it cannot be removed by medicine before it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes they do that alone, when you are not present and they lack your strength.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical operation is performed on the large wounds when it is necessary to place it over those and to keep them straight, and their recent wounds are kept clean, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then this powder is not applied to those wounds, but instead use what we have mentioned earlier, unless you place it on those wounds with honey and water mixed together; and then cure those wounds with the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if an accident occurs and the wound is small, then you remove that which we have mentioned earlier.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the treatment of fractures of the head in this poisonous substance.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs on the neck, then it is not in the difference in medicine, and between the wound of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves of the neck are severed or the artery, then if it is nerves, do not insert them into the engine but rather avoid curative treatment with that which causes strong hemostasis, as well as ziniar and zegi say that it is vetriol and similar to their quar nozo to the nerves and contract it.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place your hand on any cause of the whole forehead, as the substance of the nerves is fragile and its continuation is connected to the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that which is cured by false medicines, such as washing with warm water, some vinegar in olive oil, rotten or not, and then when it is washed with warm water and the other stones are minimized according to this manner, and found humidity.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, then administer sutures or cut the lips of it, and then cure that which is inside with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the wound is deep or has accidents in the lowest part of the foot, then pierce it in the most depressed area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If there is an artery cut in the wound and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry that, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent further bleeding.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the ribs of the chest or all have been cut, and the veins of the neck are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound over the edge of the chest and do not touch that; equalize it with the rest, and strengthen it with a proper structure, and leave it for several days until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has already penetrated the bones, then perforate that, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all that you can from them; and what is not visible to you, leave it until the wound heals, and let it be separated and the edges of it be brought together.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the wound is recent, then powder it with the powder that was recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if in the wound a fistula is made, then cure it with the oil that will soon come to its head.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds of the neck or similar ones that are made between the ribs and are made with a spatula, a knife, a lancet, or a similar instrument.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of a lancet or knife, and sometimes you see the depth of it, then consider more if the wound has warmth when the patient breathes; then you will know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth in the wound and it is recent to its own sinew, then you place powder on it in the first hour, and do not stretch it so that the sinew is not held in the depth of it and that it returns to the body and that no one hurts the patient, but place a moist dressing on it, and remove those bandages every day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the mouth is not at your present, then pause in the orifices of the wound to allow the moisture to seep out; and make sure the patient sleeps on their side so that the liquid can drain properly.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the wound has passed three days or more without causing spasm, trembling of the heart, malice, or stricture, and if other symptoms are improving, then know that the wound is healing; and then treat with compresses and other remedies until it is fully healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the wound is delayed, and it has been opened for a long time, then know that it has become a fistula; treat that by its own capital.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by a stab or cut, and is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat that with water that precedes suture, if it is large, or powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If the wound has previously been treated with poultices on the bone, and it is now cut open, then twist the wound and extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then release the intestines that are causing the pain, as their extraction is beneficial.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other pains that occur in other members, the treatment is the same as we have mentioned.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of abdominal pains.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that occurs in the abdomen is either large, or small, or variable.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the large ones, some are in the intestines or the nerves of the intestines, for which intrusion of them and the suturing of them is done more forcefully and more skillfully.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And the disruption of small ones is done difficultly by another method, and if the reduction of them is more difficult, then do not wait to insert them back into their place immediately, because they open and become larger, making the instrument for them difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is variable, because in those it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is difficult in the two species mentioned.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You should know that a belly suture is done in four ways, but two common ones are suitable for other parts of the body as well.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Two other sutures are specific to other parts of the body, but they are more specific for belly sutures.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend you to each one with exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, say that when the wound is small and there is no cause of the intestine for it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then one of two ways: either by disruption as we have said, or when the intestine is swollen due to cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when that is the case, then cover it with a cloth soaked in warm water alone, or with water and vinegar, and pepper, and spice, and embrocations at that intestine inside until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some ways do it in the one that has stopticity, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which salt and vinegar are dissolved, because for this reason it is called the instrument of life and cures many diseases.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	And if the instrument of life is applied to this cure, then gently separate the disruption with a small sharp instrument that is not inscribed with any markings.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first cure is best when it is appropriate that it does not dry out and is not occupied with the need to dry it too quickly or too slowly.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the instrument is sharp and pointed, and the other part is not sharp, and its tip is thin, but not as thin as a needle, with a slightly rounded end.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the plague has spread and the intestine has come out, then return it to its natural shape in its proper place, if possible on top of it, because that is best.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is widespread, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then make the patient lie on their side, and place their legs higher than their head; if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place your hand on their head and their chest higher than their knees.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the lower parts of the belly, then place your ear and your stethoscope quickly in that area so that the part where the pain is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus, administer this in large and small doses.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small doses, place the remedy you have prepared between your fingers and make sure the administrator holds the disruption completely with their hand and adjusts its lips, and from one to another, if there is a cause, then another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or count a needle according to the amount of the wound; and lay it on the edge of the disruption of that ring, and strengthen the needle one, or not to put it in the two ends of the thread, the two ends of the suture that are outside the thread of the parts that are inside, until you make that penetrate into that part; and you have added two ends of the thread and two ends of the suture, and so make four stitches.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then apply strong pressure around the circumference of the needle, and some stitches in several parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by aggregation, and then leave the larger one and insert another needle in that place; and then hold it with a strong force like the first needle; and do not stop doing this until the needles are all completed through the entire contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of medium size, because thin needles more easily penetrate the flesh; and large ones are difficult to insert into the codex, and therefore it is necessary that they be of medium size.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted at both ends of the codex, because the flesh should not be penetrated too easily and the wound should heal before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they should not be extended too much in stitching, so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then insert the tips of the needles so that they do not pierce the patient, and place powdered sulfur on the sutured wounds from all parts, which held the tips of the needles; and leave those in until you know that the plague has been consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of sutures with needles in a careful manner are most suitable for small wounds, where in their suture there is one needle or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is similar: and it is that you administer the four tips of the needle, two of the cord and two of the thread, in a way, with a needle that is as fine as its thickness and size.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four tips, reduce the needle from that part of the thread where it began, so that the correct retracting cord of the part that rises above the wound, so that the suture is the second suture of strong cloth.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Pause between each suture the amount of the thick part of the mentioned bandage.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This suture is for women.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	This suture is used to close the wound that occurred in a man's abdomen, which was pierced with a knife, and it was the rupture of the major plate of a palm, and it was located around two palms from the intestine of the middle member; and then I reduced it because the intestine had been exposed for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and it was treated and healed; and then I used this ointment for many years, and it was useful to him.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	Other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and by a miracle of fire, which I did not cure with that ointment, because the place where the ointment was not at all or any medicine, but only covered over the wound for two days and frequently bathed in honey water until the fire healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two special types of sutures according to the narrative of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And if you begin with the suture of the cord, enter the needle from the front side to the back side.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so, as the needle penetrates the cord and the other threads are placed correctly and in a straight line along the entire length, and leave the end of the cord in which you have inserted the needle; and make the other needle penetrate from the back side to the front side in the other end of the thread.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And so, as you have made that one penetrate, then make the other needle penetrate in another direction at the other end of the thread of the back side to the front side; and leave the end of the cord that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the thread from the front side to the back side.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the other needle penetrate in the direction that makes that one penetrate in the cord at the end of the mirror, which is in the part of it where all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then, approaching from this position and placing the other at the end that is on the other side of the cyst, extract the needle from the cyst and place it in that cyst's end that is on this side; and extract the other from the cyst.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this again and again, and do this again near another example until you have done all that is deformed according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this suturing method is that you place a sutura of pellicies on which you place the flesh, so that you suture the cyst one stitch from the part of the end of the needle, and let the other stitch complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second special suture called Gualia, and this is how it should be done for each case, is that you place that second semilunar on which the doctors place that one, so that they add all of its part to its corresponding part to nature; and apply the end of another to it and the end of the mirror to the other end of it, and this is done according to your recommendation.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you have the needle at the end of the mirror, close to your own part of the body, and make it penetrate into the part of the body from that side, and leave two extremities of the cypres; and then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from one side to the other two extremities of the cypres.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then rotate those needles, and make each one penetrate from the part of the body into the part of the body through two other extremities of the mirror on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suture is better than the common liga and is the suture described in the previous remembrance.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the word of Guilial
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And moreover, it is said that the suture of the belly is corrected with two needles, so that you insert one into each of them and begin with the insertion of the needle of which you have to do, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the second suture of those which equal the hearts.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When disruption occurs in the middle part of the abdomen, the sutures there are more difficult than those of other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of medicine for plague is judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The reason is that when you get the plague recently, the first thing to do is to deny that the air has altered it, and reduce the intestine and clean it from there and prepare it decently, then place powder on it.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then place on it an ointment that is present and makes hard and heals the wounds, and is consolidated and clear; and cure it as is the cure of other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have the medicines present, then place on it a mustard plaster, as soon as it begins to heat up, and change it twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in cases of simple plagues.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague may spread to the main members, then apply a cloth soaked in high-quality oil or rose oil, and place it around the affected area.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, then apply this remedy, which is a black stiptic root, and if the putrefaction reaches the intestine, make an incision penetrating into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You should know that the pus from large intestines is less dangerous than the pus in small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to cure the intestine known as “gegunu” from plague that has spread throughout it; this is due to the large number of veins in it, its size, and its subtle nature, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If the plague process is on the skin, and you manage to remove it, then reduce it according to your correctness, which also reduces the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If the space has already been opened and it is now white or black, then place your finger on the location where the discoloration is, to prevent blood flow from coming out, as there are veins and arteries in the skin.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert the other thread, and place both ends of your finger hanging from the edge of the wound, so that the attraction of the thread is from the wound's depth and emission of the thread from the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of wounds that have occurred in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because they have seen a person who was wounded in their stomach by a lance and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had formed a fistula, and they managed to restore it and its function.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then they continued the treatment of it as if it was not confirmed in its healing, but they stopped gradually when it became healthy and the location was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And if you see that the location has already been consolidated, then apply pressure over the patient's abdomen to prevent further injury; and do not attempt any action for that injury and remain in place, eating and drinking as usual, and then continue with bathing and exercise as prescribed.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And it has been said by experienced people that when the intestine is punctured and small, then follow this method: and you take large needles; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place a needle from those that have the mouth open over the two lips of the wound; then when you take those and strengthen your mouth, cut off the head of the needle, which adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another needle near the first one, and do not stop doing this until you have placed needles one by one according to the size of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then return that and close the wound; and leave those needles in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine is torn by a sharp object that is added to it, as it is made of thin tissue; and you should grasp the end of these thin pieces of intestine, which is very delicate, and wrap the end of the intestine in them, wrapping it with a sharp instrument and covering it with a cloth, and then reduce it to its disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching is only the second way of faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then it cannot be sewn up but only drained, and not healed from all of it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the treatment of fistulas and abscesses.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that any wound and abscess when it becomes indurated and ancient, and is made into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and does not heal completely and does not disappear, then, in whatever member it is, universally it is called a fistula, and we call it a sinus.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And in reality, a fistula is a burrowed, hard, white wound that does not cause pain and has the same cavity as a penis; and to name it, call it a penis, that is, a penis.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in moist men, the wound heals quickly; and if the humidity is removed in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this humidity is moved, and it is scarce, thick, and thin, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division, as I said about wounds, that any wound that is not healed or is not in bare flesh is not that but one of these causes: one of which is because of the lack of pus in the tissue; or by malice of the body; or because between the wound and the lips there is hard flesh that prevents the natural growth of flesh; or because of moisture in the leg; or because that wound in itself is putrid and the matter that is in it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is not suitable for its cure; or when corruption catches in the region, and it is pestilence; or by the property of the region, as in Saragossa, where digestion of evils is difficult, and healing of apostema by nature takes a long time; or because there are one or more bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Now that all those causes have been shown, and their symptoms and cures in the appropriate medical division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And here is how you should perform the cure of a fistula, which is caused by surgery.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; among these are fistulas that reach the great veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the spleen, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the joints composed as mentioned above.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And of these fistulas that follow this method are among the difficult-to-cure diseases, and do not receive treatment, and require much labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of these fistulas has such depth that it does not reach the mentioned locations, and you expect and trust in its cure, and you want to gain knowledge of it, then take an iron or a needle, and if the fistula follows the correct path, and you find it, then apply it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that thin probe, as the thin probe lifts the weight of their body and straightens the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is very difficult to reach, it may not be possible to use that probe on it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then insert the catheter through its openings, as the moisture you use to clean it also cleans the other openings and comes from there.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then carefully examine, according to the method that is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the long fistula or protruding fistula is its cavity, or it is a fistula with many openings that is completely above your strength, your perplexity, the patient's pain, and the invention of the cause of the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all these causes, then proceed to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, long from the joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places that I have told you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry the fistula after it has been drained, and remove any material that is in that filter and rotten flesh, and any material that is born in the orifices of the flesh, or from the intestines and similar, and cure that within which it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and is straight, then cut it as much as possible from the front, and remove all rotten flesh; and administer cotton soaked in acute medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that to it for some time until the acute medicine has corroded all that is in the cavity of the fistula of the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with the ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it does not heal by that, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of fistula is bone and it must be confirmed to you, then inquire about that and seal it after we have recommended, if you do not prevent any cause of vein or of nerve or of principal member present as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and is in any corruption and blackness, then remove that which the corruption covers completely; and cure that part with the same that the flesh inside is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and the bone breaks as it did before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and then you expose it again in the second place and carefully make the reason of it and the purification of it with the strongest fortification, and then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And then if it is healed, good; and if not, know that that corruption is in the deep far part of the body, which has not been achieved, and then you do not enter into that but leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the broken bone is small, or you are able to pull it back into place, then use fine forceps that are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if you have the strength to extract all of them, then do so carefully without any cause that weakens your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you encounter any resistance due to moisture, and there is no fear or error at the beginning, then insert those ligaments or flesh that are there, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you do not have the preparation to extract bones from your own hour, then place that which can harden that area over those bones of flesh and ligaments, and keep the area from becoming consolidated and strengthened the section that you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	However, if you are afraid, place that which is submerged in the supertar trissat oil, or submerged in Egyptian anguent, or in any of the verdant oils, because when they harden those ligaments, and the bones are separated from them, the dislocation is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If there is a large bone like those of the thigh or cushion or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the surface of it, then remove that resin only behind where that blackness and corruption is, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the area where the corruption reaches, and then cure that before it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend that you have someone who has experience and assistance over your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around the age of thirty, who experiences pain in his thigh, and from the parts that are corrupted on the matter of the body within which the matter reaches the thigh, and that is a large abscess, and not an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then he extended the time with that until the abscess was formed, and after that matter moved, and his cure was not paused until the thigh was fistulated, and in those wounds all the pus was drained and the moisture of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the cure was taught to many doctors around two years, and not in those times but in the art, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the bed of the patient and the matters that flowed from him to those orifices by great veins; and his condition was completely stable and the color of his blood was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the needle into one of those orifices and reached the needle to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I quickly examined all the orifices and found that they were open from all parts of the bed.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I guided and inserted into one of the orifices those that described a part of the bone, and at the same time I found that it was rotten and corrupted, and already decayed and corrupted; and a part of the bed had already been penetrated by the meat.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I prepared that which was discovered from the bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I saw that it was not in the bone but that corruption which had been cut and prepared, and it had already been discarded.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then, by means of medical consolidating remedies for a long time, the wound does not consolidate.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then, by repeatedly examining and discovering the second bone under the first, the corruption continues in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And then, by repairing that which appears to be corrupted from it, and by making a fair cure for it and restoring it, it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then, by discovering another method and not ceasing to gradually incise the small parts of it, the restoration of it is not restored until around half of it is incised, and that which was extracted from its marrow, and by repairing it with medicines, it is consolidated again and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation of cutting and sectioning it, but by the arrangement of its bones and by the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of death, because in all hours, due to excessive evacuation, bad sinews occur.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore, the healing is for complete cure, and nothing is in place of hard meat; and it is well positioned in its own body and returns its virtue; and it is converted in its positions and does not do harm to it in ambulation or in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If there is an eminent bone in the body that has been broken, then follow this method: and it is that you take a bandage and strong that at the end of that eminent bone, and command anyone to extend that over; and place that wool thicker than the first bandage; and put it on the flesh that is left after the bone, and extend the outside of it so that it pulls the flesh to the parts left, and you uncover the flesh over the place that you want to sew so that the stitch does not hurt the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place the table under the bone properly, because when you do that it is not forbidden to sew so that the stitch does not rot the flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And make the stitch on the rotten part little by little, because if it is in the hollow of the rotten bone and does not appear at its surface to the touch, and force the stitch of it another way.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	When the bone is decayed and not broken into pieces, if it is found in one continuous piece from one end to the other, and the decay is in the middle or in a separate piece, then you should remove all the flesh from all parts; and then place a dressing, and then suture the first piece where the decay is before continuing the suturing of the other piece.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if the suturing is in the location of the decay, then it should be a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the decay is at the joint, incise that decayed joint, and suture the bone where it continues from the other piece.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the decay is in the continuation of two joints, then it should not be in the ratio but rather in a gentle manner.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the decay is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is quite difficult; however, you should inquire about the decay and remove it in whatever manner it appears to you, and wash it with each possible disposition, and when no contrary venous or nerve comes out, it should be corrected to you.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know what are the saws and files to cut these bones are according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and variety of those, and their hardness and rarity; so that you can prepare all kinds of tools suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that for that operation, the special tool that is needed depends on your skill and long experience in this art, and knowledge of the ways of illnesses, because you have already learned how to apply all the tools suitable for each disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you should know that at the end of this chapter, the number of tools that you will use simply and those that you will process according to your prohibition, which you will experience over the others.
Forma de serra:	Saw shape:
Forma de autra serra:	Another saw shape:
Forma de autra serra:	Another saw shape:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Another large saw shape:
Forma de ray:	The form of a ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The second part of this ray should be in the shape of a starry crown, and its points should be in the shape of steel pins.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It is not appropriate to apply them only when the joints are damaged or the mouth is very wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	The form of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	The form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	The form of a wide razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The form of another well-made saw: make the arc of it as round and sharp as a steel blade, and the handle of it should be made of wood.
Forma de lu:	The form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The form of a razor with concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	The form of another delicate razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The form of another curved-end razor:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The form of a small razor resembling a tent stake:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The form of an instrument that cuts through bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of a smaller surgical instrument:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another instrument; this resembles a saw, and its end is shaped like a blade, and it is used in various places in the region of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a saw that suits the region where bones are pierced:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and has a sharp tip.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly covered with a coating that all the causes we have mentioned for saws and surgical instruments and blades.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	From the beginning of its ends and the cutting of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The ends may be sharp or due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or because you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the cure does not work, or sometimes the corruption must leave the member that is not cut by any cause, then cover that member within that wound to prevent the patient from dying or suffering from a greater evil that is more harmful to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	When the member of the patient who has suffered, is blackened by fire or pored over with boiling lead, or if the burn is near the member that enters into that one and spreads throughout the body; then cover it with a cloth.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if it is caused by the corruption of some poisonous causes such as a scorpion's bite or of a viper or of a rattle snake and similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or poisoning is at the end of that member, then you should insert it and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	Similarly, if it enters the body, then you should insert that of the root of the fire and not give space to the corruption until it is in the fire of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you have inserted that, then insert the arm into the hole at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption passes around the hole, then the patient will die; and in the treatment of that quantity of virtue, give another cause.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, if decay has caused the nail to fall off, then you should insert that into one of the knuckles.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it is taken from the sole of the foot, then you should insert the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it can enter the ankle, then you should insert the cushion into the joint of the ankle.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if decay has already reached the ankle, then there is no remedy, and leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of inserting the member or cutting it is that you strengthen the membrane at the part just before the one you want to insert, and strengthen another membrane over the area; and extend the minister a membrane to the parts behind, and extend the minister another membrane on top; and you separate the flesh that is between two membranes at a distance of about an inch apart so that the entire flesh is revealed; and then insert or cut.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover it with cloth from all parts so that it does not touch the area, and bring the patient's injury and pus adjusted and covered.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If there is bleeding when working, then you should cauterize the area constantly, or place some restrictive powders on it; and then return to your medical practice before it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place the affected member in a suitable position, and cure it before it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And you should also recommend to that person who has such an accident in his foot, this method that you and I have recommended, which is likely to occur to him because of the black color in his foot due to burning that was similar to a fireburn.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption occurs first in his great toe before it affects the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that person prepared for such severe pain and burning of the member that he could not bear it, and the insensitive foot entered into the joint, and it was healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that same corruption occurs in the great toe of the right foot.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it happened to me, and I was able to reflect on that excess in the water used for medicines, approaching the purification of that member; and the excess was not reflected, and it started to go to the other foot where it began.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to incise the abdomen of the patient, but I did not want to do so without considering the risk of such a superfluous procedure, and more than that, I feared for the life of the patient, as the patient's condition was critical.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he left me, he returned to his land and reached me that that man prepared and incised the entire abdomen of the patient, and was cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not related this story except to be helpful in this case of illness, and to indicate the meaning by which it is signified and the second in which it is done.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the care of the intestines and the quality of the enema with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in a hollow member, the space of the abscess extends until it collects pus, and it is then ruptured and perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the place where it was becomes like a vessel, and the code that covers it is thin cloth, and it does not reach back to corruption, and it is not impressed into bone or nerve or tissue, it is called sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	When the space is extended before corruption occurs in any member, it is then called a fistula and not an abscess.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The cure for it is to insert that entire coat as it is revolved, and more so when it is thinned out and made with cloth, and to ensure that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the coat sticks and that that corruption has not been achieved due to subsequent consequences, and if there is a hole in the coat, then you treat it with ointment.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And if you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and if the liquid that comes out has an unpleasant odor, then you treat it with Egyptian ointment which is made of oil, wine, and honey, and equal parts are placed in a vessel and covered over the fire until the medicament turns red and reaches the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then take that water that is necessary and dissolve it with the vinegar and honey; and treat the sinus with that, strengthen the orifices of it, and leave the medicine in it for a quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then gradually remove that dirty cloth; and do so for several days until the wound is cleansed and remains moist.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Some wounds are cleaned with ash water, when this medicament is not present; and you take the ashes of vine, put them on the water; and then apply that cloth to it and cleanse the wound with it until you confirm that the wound has healed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicament or ash water, then cleanse that cloth with water and honey mixed with a third part of wine, and cleanse the wound with honey, because honey cleans and moistens, and it makes the wound stick together, and more so when there is an excess of stipulation and dryness in the wound.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do that for some wounds and confirm that the wound has healed, then cleanse that cloth with water that makes the flesh in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you should take some dentifrice and dissolve that oily substance and apply a stinging ointment; or you should make a clyster of some medicines and other oils that have the properties to heal, as I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the sinus are narrow and do not receive the clyster needle, then you should gradually enlarge them with a small iron until it is wide enough, and wrap them in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	Similarly, if the orifices are wide, then you should add some sutures to the edges of the ointment and leave enough quantity so that the clyster can be added inside.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of the intestine from which the intestine protrudes is elevated to the parts above, then dry that place in the lower part where the intestine passes through, because when the intestine is constricted at the sinus opening, the flesh will be in the lower part.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus inside the environment of the lower jaw as you wish, then prepare the limb for the procedure by applying a bandage according to your preference and ensuring that there is no cause for retention of the bandage.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidative medications that are placed on the sinus at an appropriate location and apply them to a cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a size that it covers the entire sinus; and then insert the forceps into the opening of the sinus in a tract that is slightly wider than the opening of the sinus; and then extend another cloth from the mouth of the lemons according to the quantity of the tract, and place it over the previous one for a long position of the sinus opening so that the secretion of the jaw is not blocked but rather the cloth is only slightly pressed against it.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And the one that is on the opening of the sinus should remain in place for the entire hour to ensure that what is applied to the jaw remains there.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know whether that which flows from the arm is much or little, or digested, or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And if you consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And if your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is exuded over the opening of the sinus already adhering, or it begins to adhere, then you should remove it or remove it on the third day, and when you remove the pus, then change the dressing and renew the poultice.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if from the sinus there is an approach of subtle viruses, then do not despair of the adherence of it, because the healing of it will approach, because in some people in which it takes a long time for flesh to grow in those pus-filled places, and in those in which it is done the opposite of that.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinus there is an approach of undigested matter for several days, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and it is the cause of prolonged treatment, then you adjust in the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as with a poultice when they are adjusted with excess of salt.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most distant part that is cured, you should take some duck fat and dissolve it in warm oil, and place it on top of the wound like its substance, and then comfort that part with it, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And you do the same thing in that action, when there is no bone, duck fat, when it is thickened, and use it; or take mirror, aloe, and honey, and grind everything together and powder it over the wound when it is on top of the fire, and then apply that to a cloth and strengthen that on the wound; and apply that which you have ground inside where it is thickened, and powder it over a cloth.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some wounds are treated with the long-lasting and strong lily of the valley (and that is the lily of the valley) and flour of almonds, centaury, and use those simple or adjusted remedies, grind those and crush them and powder them over the wound which I have recommended; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the sinus persists and is not healed by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the front of the patient, and already examine the bones or other hard members or the ligaments; then treat it with fistular cure, as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the treatment of nails and toes worn out and with incision of the finger and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Nails and toes are abscesses that do not come out from under the nail of the big toe or foot, and often they come out in the other mentioned ones, and if it persists and its treatment is highly valued, it is a cautious abscess, or it is corrupted, and often it penetrates into the bone before the smell of decay, and it is made at the end of the said toe, and its color is made dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have that which we have mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment, then you should cut with a knife all the excess that is left of the nail and then cauterize the wound with a cautery, because the cautery is useful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is broken and the finger is healed, and the surrounding tissues of the finger have already expanded to cover the parts divided by the bone, and the pain and swelling have subsided, then you should gently place your hand on the angle of the finger that is causing pain, and push it towards the affected area, and insert it into the flesh with ease, and pause over that which remains of the flesh of the medicines that were burning corrosively until it is completely healed; and then cure it with ointment until it is completely healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already spread to the bone, then you should insert the bone and remove it, because there is no time that can heal what is corrupted in the bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption spread to that part, then you should insert it into one of the bones according to what is remembered, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the finger has percussion or atrophy, and there is severe pain in that part, then you should first lance the patient, and then dry the finger with a sharp transverse cut above it, and be careful that the cut does not reach into the flesh that is behind the finger, for if you do, you will cause the patient severe pain and unnecessary damage to the adjusted flesh in that location; and then cure that place with something that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May this be adjusted, which is not in the muscles of most men, but is very fleshy overall, and is very fleshy in the bones, or very fleshy in the nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And it is not in the root of the joint, or it is the origin of it in other people's bones.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is not in the bones of the said person, and this which is not in the joints, is very bad.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are not fleshy, the section is thinner, and it is that you incise that devil's root with a thin blade.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But of those that are not in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, be careful with its incision.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in that which is not in the said devil's root, you should incise at the beginning of the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then press one of those suitable needles into it, and cure it while it is healing.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	When the consolidation occurs between the mentioned bones, either due to birth defects of the person who was born that way, or due to consolidation of plague, or due to burning by fire, or due to similar reasons, then it is necessary for that consolidation to be removed before those bones return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place cloth between their clothes to prevent the humors from infiltrating, and separate those, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until it is consolidated, according to what happens.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly, if consolidation occurs in the palm of those hands, then you should remove that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the beginning of vice, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varicose, and their veins are thick and full of superfluous melancholic humors that come from the limbs of the body, and the greatest occurrence of them is in the buttocks, and especially in the buttocks of travelers and workers and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then, in order to administer a purge of the body for black cholera, some strong expelling agents are used, and then draw blood from the patient's great vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure of their arm is done in two ways: one way is to cut it and pour the black bile out, and the other way is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The sectioning of the arm is done in this way: first, apply heat to the thigh to make the black bile flow quickly, which is abundant in the thigh, and then gently massage the patient's arm to a higher position than the cushion, and then tie it with a band at the part where the arm joins the body, and dry the vein in one, two, or three wide sections, and then elevate the black bile above the patient's elbow into their arm, and then below it, until the desired amount and number of times have been reached, which the patient can tolerate.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And approach that one, and command them to refrain from foods causing black bile generation.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are full and that is not noticed by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Raise their leg in this manner: if there are mottled spots on the patient's thigh, and you place it in hot water and rub the leg with an elbow-length cauda until it becomes red and the veins are exuded; or if that is not possible, within which the member is scalded.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the ligament on the side of the vein in the long or back part of the leg, or at the bottom of the thigh, or at the top of the foot.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open the ligament with a lancet and scrape the vein from all parts until it appears at the sensation, and that is the indication of which time that question declines to black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then with the lancet you will see that white thread that is the cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place your hand behind that one which is raised and held by the chain, and hang that one with the open orifice of the lion.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then approach another section close to that section for three times, and then remove the chain from the part above the vein where it appeared.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then lift that one and insert it into the other section behind the calf, and then remove it and place it inside where it is on the second section, and then remove it from the section above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do that inside where it is extracted from the section that is most superior or farthest from all sections, where everything is inserted; and then insert it there.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to extract and raise it, then insert a sharp needle with a strong double thread and tie it there and remove it, or insert it behind the chain and rotate your hand in all parts where it is tangled.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not inserted; because if it is broken, it is difficult to raise that one and it comes over the patient for that harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When the whole area around the wound has been cleaned, then pause over the location of the wound, which is submerged in vinegar and oil, both rotten and not rotten, and cure that which is unhealthy.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is twisted and has a winding shape that does not follow the straight line as we have said, then cut across all parts of the tortuosity of it and the locations of its covering, and suspend them together with a needle in those that lift the whole.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to cut the vein and not to press that area, for it is difficult to lift that; and use your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision made on the vein:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of a needle:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not like those that are sharp at the end so that it does not cut the vein; and it should be of great flexibility, lion, for if it were too thin, it would cut the vein by its thinness; having too much thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of vein extraction from the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is born in the buttocks, in lowlands like Ategi in Arabic lands and in dry and arid lowlands with little vegetation, where there is no herb or abundance.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also born in other parts of the body besides the buttocks.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the action of this vein is due to putrefaction that leaves the wound like venom that poisons the body, snakes, and worms that generate between the wound and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the susceptibility of this vein to its occurrence is due to the fact that it happens in the buttock, inflammation is very strong; and at the location, it is blistered; and as soon as the vein is removed from the location of that blister, it seems to be of plant origin.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when it appears, cover it with a cloth of lead that is the weight of a dragon, within two drachms, and tie that to it and leave the lead suspended from the buttock.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so many times when some cause is unknown to the parts affected, wrap that in cloth and bandage it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the pain is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and wrap it around; do not incise that of the skin until it is outside and dry, because if you incise that, it will contract and go into the flesh and cause an abscess and pus in the area and ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it can be treated properly and removed little by little, until it is extracted from the back of it and there is no cause left in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it is said to have been extracted in some men who were in their length of 20 palms and has reached me that it was 1 of 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, then introduce the ray into the wound and pierce that through the long track to the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the area for several days with medicines; and cure that by the cure of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes causes pain, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it brings pain to that orifice, and it is thought to be from that orifice.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat it as we have said in the division and apply that which is above mentioned.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section of worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is not named in any land, but it is called bovine illness because of the many veins that enter the beasts and it is a worm that is not between the flesh and the skin, and it goes through all the body and descends, and it is shown at the sensation of its own member in member until it disrupts the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is by putrefaction of some humors like what happens to worms and serpents and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its evil, because when it enters the body and is raised to the head, and reaches the brain, then it strongly inflames in the brain and enters and destroys the brain, and that causes many veins.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to cure that and extract it, it is not done unless you first assess its appearance and position relative to the senses, and then strengthen what is above it and what is below it with a loose and strong bandage, and then dry it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is located in the flesh and not on the surface, then place a pointed cautery over the area where it is, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it which corrupts the surrounding area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see that it has reached the top of the bone, then strengthen above the supercilium with a strong bandage, and then dry it and extract that; and advise the patient to use remedies that evacuate bad humors and putrid substances, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From section over pain.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is not called by our land gout, and it is pain that occurs in various members, and it moves from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	I have already seen the second thing that I will tell you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	He was called to a sick woman in a village, and discovered her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and as it had been there for an hour, he saw that inflammation go away as if worms were moving in this, but more slowly than it should be, like silver when it moves from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain went away from that place and remained in the muscle, and stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it corrected itself in the other body before reaching the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I told him that it was turning over throughout his body, and he was amazed at the change of it and the speed of member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen that happening in the same way with other people, but I had not seen such words that make pain to be changed from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I have not seen that happening in the same way with women.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was that because of the woman being old, having dry skin and exposed veins, and in this case the sensation of warmth was reversed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this second reversal does not appear in those who are delicate and have warm bodies with constricted veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And as you want to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, then do not apply it to the healthy skin with the same method as we have said, but strengthen it over him and gently press on that area where the warmth is covered, and cauterize the location.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see the veins, then cure that from the exclusion of the body and that which expels warmth, and give those who are fetid and those that are made of serapi and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of sage.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sage is diverse according to the species, and according to the locations of the body where they are found, their diversity is that some have large points, and small ones, and concave, and deaf ones, and from them there are three angles, and from those that have tongues; and from those that have astelas.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	When it comes to the second part of the body and the feet in which the second method is used: when pain occurs in one of these members or their main parts, such as the brain, heart, lung, liver, kidneys, and bladder, and similar organs; and when you notice that death approaches from any of these parts, the cause of which you should recognize immediately, then cover those parts and avoid extraction of that part in the majority of cases, and when you do not see these symptoms and the part is not hidden deep within the member, then extract it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When symptoms occur in the second part of the servant and pass through the bone, and are above the skull, which is on top of the brain, because of very strong soda, scotoma, vertigo, pain in the joints, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding and vomiting of anger, and great weakness is removed from the word and the voice is destroyed, and it is above the location of the wound, white humidity similar to pus, and yellowish like the consistency of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if you are not able to perform the cure and extraction of the splinter, then do not attempt it.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the splinter is lodged in the heart, and it is close to the right breast, and it causes pain similar to that caused by a hard object, but not by a sharp one; and the movement of the splinter resembles the movement of the limbs, and it causes dark bile, and this frigidity of the extremities, and sweating, and trembling; and therefore you know that death is approaching.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And when the splinter has pierced the lung completely with black bile from the bile, and the veins that are close to the neck become inflamed, and the patient's color changes, and they breathe heavily, and demand air frequently; and therefore you know that death is approaching.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the splinter pierces the skin on the chest, and the pain is close to the small ribs, and it causes a great sharp pain and a loud cry, and does not spare all the limbs of the muscles; and therefore you know that death is approaching.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If the patient's stomach is filled with food, it may cause great pain and vomiting of undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the food remains in the stomach and causes pain or vomiting, it may be due to a tear in the stomach lining, intestine, or hernia, which is not expected to heal with its removal.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the food is in the bladder and causes discoloration of urine, it may be due to some cause of the parts, and if the pain is severe on the patient, it is likely to be fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other parts of the body, such as the face, neck, chest, shoulders, arms, ribs, backbone, and intestines, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when food does not block veins or arteries and is not poisonous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	I will recommend this to you who have seen these foods, so that you know what it means for the treatment of this condition.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of this is that in a man, a sharp object enters the lacrimal canal of his eye through the corner of his nose, and it is extracted from there to the other side, beyond the gray matter of his eyeball, and he is cured, and no harm is done to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And another sharp object was extracted from a Jew, which entered his eye through the gray matter of his eyeball, beyond his upper eyelid, and the object had already been hidden and could not be removed except for a small part that adhered to his eyeball, and it was a very sharp object like those of the Turks, made of iron without any gold.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The Jew was cured, and no harm was done to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And another sharp object was extracted from a Christian man, which had been inserted into his stomach, and it was an Arabic object, and it was this one that entered his eye; and then he inserted two small needles over it, and it was already submerged in his stomach; and then he carefully removed it, and the Christian man was cured.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And another sage was extracted from a man who had fallen into his own belly, and it was thought that he would die from that; and since it had passed thirty days and nothing changed on him due to his conditions, it was inserted into the wound and covered over it, and he was cured, and no harm came to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And another man was seen in whom a wound had occurred on his back, and the wound had become infected over him, and after seven years, the wound healed in the center of the cushion.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And a woman was seen in whom a wound had occurred in her belly, and the wound had become infected inside of it, and she was not moved from her conditions at all, and the woman was not harmed in some of her natural activities.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And another man was seen in whom a wound had occurred on his face, and the wound had become infected and rotted, and he did not experience much pain, and similar to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And the wound was extracted from the prince of the king who had fallen into his own nose and had already declined to the straight part, and the entire wound was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to treat him near the chamber of the sage within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I again examined the wound of the sage; and then I inquired about that woman with subtle torture, and she did not feel it; but he felt the pricking under her ear, and then I suspected that that prick was at the end of the sage.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied the ointment in which is the active and digestive virtue, believing that this place would help me to find the location of the sage, so that it could be removed from her.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no accident occurred in that significant location where the sage had achieved that place; and I continued to apply the ointment on her for several days without any accident; and the wound remained stable during that time, and the patient's condition improved over several days until one day the sage felt pain in her nose and told me about it.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied sharp and corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until fire was inserted, and with the test I removed that, and again examined the end of the sage subtly, which adhered to the wood.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then approach and adjust in the opening of the wound by that sharp medicine until I see its end through my visibility, and pass it through the spaces of time within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then approach and increase the wound, and focus on inserting the forceps into it, and remove that, and do not neglect to continue subtly and ingeniously over that with various methods of engineering until one day you can hang that with forceps descented made, according to the shape of those at the end of the chapter, until you extract that; and then restore that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And then doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and I restore that and the wound is consolidated, and the patient is healed entirely, and there is no need in it in any case.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some sagetas for that you can apply this rule and meaning on it that I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by narration nor understood those freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the craftsmen know how to compare one thing with another; and they know what is present where it is absent; and they must acquire new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes when an accident occurs.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so they say that wisdom is not removed from the members in which they are fixed, but rather by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which it is inserted; or by the opposite side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is removed by the place in which it is inserted, or proceeds in a fleshy location, and is attracted and removed.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the instruction of the hour in which it is catched, then wait for several days until the flesh that is around it becomes soft, and attract it and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is fixed in bone and does not obey your instruction, then wait for several days and repeat that with attraction and motion on each day, and it will be removed.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey your superior's command to approach those days, then carefully pierce the circle of the spine in that bone of all parts with a subtle needle until that place is widened by the spine, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the spine is stuck in the skull bone and has already proceeded into one of the bellies of the brain, and appears in the patient with those accidents that I have mentioned, then stop the extraction of the spine and leave it inside until its condition becomes equal to approaching those days; because if the spine penetrates the cerebrum, then death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the spine is not stuck in the body bone only and does not pass into the cerebrum, and the patient has been approaching those days for a long time, and no accident has occurred due to those accidents, then you should engage in the attraction of the spine and the attraction of it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is stuck and you do not obey the extraction order, then administer needles in the circle of the spine as we have recommended, and cure the place until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the patient's breath has already been trapped in the body, and it is also obscured from sensation, then you should ask for that tool, and if you feel it, then you should direct it towards the patient with appropriate instruments.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach the patient due to the crowding of the crowd and the length of the prone position, and there are no nerves or veins nearby, then you should perform on the body where it is possible to extract the breath.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have the tools that should be held, then you should remove the flesh in which it is stuck from all parts of the body with all the force you can; and use those tools to dislodge the flesh from the fracture of the ribs and the twisting of those bones until they obediently yield.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the breath in each place where it is, then you should use your hand with forceps to all parts until it forms that obedience; and subtly use the subtlety that the breath is not broken and that it is formed according to your difficult access to the patient and the extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot do it immediately, then wait until the parts that are in the circuit of the patient can be separated, and then repeat that which was previously done.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you encounter resistance from the patient's blood flow, then administer the remedy we have mentioned for treatment in its capital.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your skill in the beginning of the vein or nerve or cord, and administer medicine in every possible way to facilitate and quiet and delay and close it as much as possible with ease and according to your recommendation.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, make the patient resist against the vein so that the patient is according to the figure by which you should heat the opening of the vein in him, which is more advantageous.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But if the veins that are out of reach by the resistance of the other part or that have already been connected to some part in him, or if the external exit of the vein is impeded by the feeling of the part below the proposed code and then again, then you should secure it; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps are taken.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bone, then twist the second contrary direction before the saw enters the bone, and widen the opening, and remove that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If not, leave it for a few days, and then repeat that until it comes out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the saw is in that, then push that against the bone.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If it has fallen off and you want to administer an impact, then insert that into the bone, if it is hollow, use a probe to make sure that the hollow of it enters the blade of the saw and then push that against the bone.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the saw is hollow, then push that against the strong probe as it enters into that, because the saw is guided by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the saw is poisoned, then make sure that you hollow out all the flesh in which it is located, if it is possible to do so, and then cure that with something appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the saw catches in the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is close to where you touch that with the tent, and it is possible to cut around it, then cut around it and be careful not to injure any veins or nerves, and then remove that, and afterwards clean the wound if necessary, and cure that before it becomes healthy.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps used to grasp the jaws:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	With their extremities bent like the beak of an eagle, which are made like a claw when placed on the jaw to prevent it from being lost:
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from those, special types of motors are made, large, few and varied, according to the size of the jaw and its width, and the breadth of the wound, and the construction of it:
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of concave impeller of this extremity bent like the beak of an eagle to prevent the instrument from slipping in it, and to push that deaf one:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of deaf extremity impeller:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Bent like the ray to prevent the instrument from slipping in it and being pushed by that one:
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of vein puncture.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy of which the blood is usually drawn from, of which there are sixteen in the head, two pulsating veins that are called temporalis; two herbs that are on both temples; and two veins that are in two lacrimal glands that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is in the end of the nose; and two guidegi that are at the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are left the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	May the veins that are cut in the arms be visible; for one of them is cephalic, and it is called wild thyme; and the people call it "the head vein", and it is deaf, and it is a migratory vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and the people name it "the vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein that is paused in the domestic thigh, and it is called "citillar", and the common people call it "the vein of the belly"; and the funis of the arm, and it is paused over the fire, and it is the one in which it is cut, and it is the one that appears on the foot for apparent manifestation; and the salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the little ear and the smallest, and it is in the two grooves.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and leg there are three veins; one of them is called the curvature of the knee of the wild thigh; and the second is sophena, and its location is under the buttock of the domestic thigh; and the sciatic vein, and its location is under the buttock of the wild thigh; and in the buttock there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The inflammation of the veins that approach the ears is due to ancient and recurrent catarrhs, phlegm, and old ulcers on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The quality of the treatment for those is as follows: it is to wash the patient's head, and to bathe the patient's head in the occipital region where the veins are abundant with a thick cloth and good friction; then strongly massage the patient's neck between the two places where the veins appear and their locations near the ears; and if you feel pain in those places, here is an attempt.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the surgical lancet, and it is the one that punctures, and then you introduce it behind the vein into the groove where the bleboteum comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then lift your hand with the vein and the groove above and puncture the vein at the beginning of the incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers or about that; and make it deeper as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then apply strong herbs and leave them inside to be healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already at the beginning of the book, I indicated those and their cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The veins and arteries that are at the temples, which is the basis of phlebotomy, is an ancient and wicked and tiresome and corrosive excessive effusion to the head.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomy for those is as follows: strengthen the patient with their own hand, where the veins appear at the sensation by manifest perception and show the color of their blood, and then you should try it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you lift the coda over the vein at the parts indicated by your hand, and insert the phlebotomist behind, and raise the vein up; and insert it there as you have done in other veins; and make it bleed according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then leave the patient's bandage off, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place over that cushion and herbs and apply strong pressure on that with great constraint, and leave it inside to be healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And before the remembrance of their names, and of those who began it, and its attachment to the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the complaint of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is approached by the phlebotomy of the cephalic to the ancient maladies of the face and emigration, and rotten and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that you recommended to me; so it is that the patient strengthens his neck with a band in which appears the vein; and then take the instrument called the fossor, which is this form of it:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the puncta eminent which is at the top of the fossor above that vein and strike on it with a pen or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood run according to the quantity you want; and then remove the puncture from the patient and strengthen that through which it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some veins are opened with phlebotomy laterally, however it is not recommended that the phlebotomy be of acute extremity as with other phlebotomies, in front of the lateral extremity, and phlebotomize that according to the transverse, where the bones are properly placed and strongly trenched in that when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The inflammation of the two veins that are near the lacrimal ducts of both eyes due to a skin rash and sores in the eyes, and facial maladies.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the laryngoscopy is that the patient should tilt their head back, and then you place the laryngoscope in those, and you stand over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	If the laryngoscopy is done horizontally a little bit to the side where there is no flesh; and if the laryngoscope is thin, then the tip of it is broken off.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then run warm water over those wounds as much as is necessary, and place your hand over them, and stretch them out for a moment, and then remove them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The laryngoscopy of the nasal vein is compared to acute fever and violent soda, and facial maladies and migraine and sores that occur on the face, and especially when it is old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the laryngoscopy is that the patient should tilt their head back and then you place their left hand on their own nose, and take a thin laryngoscope and place it in that location at the right side of the forehead of the nose straight, where the vein does not appear here, and where the wound begins to bleed soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	When you have finished massaging the patient's glans bit by bit and removing the sand as needed; then apply that to a cloth, which is then restored properly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The swelling of the glans from the previous treatment should be reduced by applying leeches, starting from the base and treating various malignancies and skin conditions, such as herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of the glans massage is that the patient should lie down on their back with a cloth; and the artist should be positioned on top of the patient's head, and the patient should be lying on a bed.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then massage the vein along its length with wide glans bit by bit; and remove sand as needed, in appropriate quantities or as needed; and do the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then remove the cloth and stretch the two veins with gentle pressure to prevent the patient from being frightened, and leave it in place until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the use of the trocar for veins, compared to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the trocar for those is that it pierces the patient from you, and strengthens the neck of it with a bend, and then rotates the lips of it and looks at two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the color of each of those, and that is more so in the area around those small black veins; and therefore incise each from the beginning.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if doubt is from you, and you do not know which of those is, then first you understand the incision of the larger of those, and the most obvious of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary to incise the two veins that are on the side of the labia.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	It is also customary to use the lingual tonsil as a prefocal point for the cephalic vein, which is located in the pharynx, and for the patient's uvula and other oral cavity abnormalities.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of performing this procedure is that the patient should lie between your hands facing upwards, and raise their tongue, and observe from behind the tongue, on one side of the vein and on the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform the lingual tonsillectomy on each side; and be careful not to damage your hand in performing this procedure near those, as they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that have been lingual tonsillectomized in the cavity are the same as those found in all men, and the lingual tonsillectomy is performed in two ways, either by placing a small, pointed tool or an olive-shaped tool that declines; or by cutting with a scalpel, and applying pressure to stop the bleeding, and this is the form of the tool:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this disease is considered to be of a cutting nature and of those that are specific, subtle, according to the size of the veins and according to the structure of those parts.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of influenza:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	And if the disease is present, it is considered to be of an opening nature and it is appropriate to open the concave veins that are full and proceeding from large, rough surfaces, and to those that contain thick, heavy masses.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of influenza that is like an olive:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this influenza is of lesser magnitude and more subtle ending, and it is appropriate for the opening of thin veins that contain thin, subtle masses.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	And the main benefit of the opening of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: that it extracts the mass of diseases that are left in the abdomen and the chest, and from that which goes to the chest and the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is appropriate for the vein-opener, when opening that vein, to guard against that and have fear in that, where there is an artery, and if it goes wrong and is adjusted in the puncture of the vein-opening, it will cut that artery and cause the flow of masses, so that one does not open that vein with a vein-opener that is sharp, but rather with a sharp knife as for the disease.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear due to a manifest reason, then let it be left there and move to the other, or encircle some of its parts; or use a hook in place of its end, which is manifest; and close it with a hook as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	However, if you want to use the bleeding lancet of the vein, then first note the structure of the arm where you are working, and place your hand over it; and hold the arm and close the concave section of the vein with the hook as we have said; and be careful not to strike the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, with strength, the ligament, inflate in the place where you have placed your hand, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flowing in the bleeding lancet as thin as the gold of an infant, and the blood is subtle, then know that it is from the blood of the artery; and then take and place your hand over it for a long time; and if the blood is abscinded, because many veins are abscinded, then strengthen the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And guard the patient from the cold, and be vigilant over them and do not neglect them until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	However, if the abscess is not drained, and sometimes when there is no medicine available for that, then you inscribe the artery, as it appears to you; because the extremity of it is contracted, and the abscess is drained; or you take a lancet and puncture it, and then take the other end and strengthen it over the location of the vein with stricture descending below the skin and into the other side.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the abscess is drained, it is good; and if not, then cure that from which it was preceded in the remembrance of the location of the powders for draining the flow of pus.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the drainage of the abscess from that location is difficult due to its small size and the possibility of the skin of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	However, if the vein is dark, the fleubotomy is very useful for extracting the pus from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the chest; because it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And approach the phlebotomist who is most skilled in the phlebotomy of the patient, as it is over a vein; and then adjust the needle in the puncture of the phlebotomist and avoid the vein, causing great pain to the patient, and it is difficult to heal him, and often he is not healed at all. And this vein appears to the senses; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not shown, then approach the phlebotomist with the needle that you used for the section of the artery, and avoid the vein with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then puncture the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The sign of the phlebotomy of the vein of the head is that it draws the cure from the head and compares to the evils of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And approach this properly, if you want the phlebotomist to puncture with an olive or a fir needle; because it is the safest of all veins, as it is not over the artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	May it be understood that the laryngoscopy you have must not prick the cap of the shoulder only, and encircle the area closer to the neck, and not touch it, but rather at the first percussion, which should be on the area near the laryngoscopy some weeks.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, if the abscess is in some men, when not laryngoscopied in the first percussion, it should not be touched again at that abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the laryngoscopy of that and its accidents should be considered in which you think of their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you know that laryngoscopy should not be administered except for the preservation of health and hope of it and caution against the occurrence of diseases, and that laryngoscopy should be performed on one of the veins that are in the code, such as cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and that laryngoscopy should be performed at the beginning of primaveyra, after breakfast in primaviera and autumn, and in winter at dinner, when there are signs of replenishment.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And perform a phlebotomy at three in the afternoon, after three hours have passed since the beginning of the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	More phlebotomy is administered when it is necessary and convenient for that patient, whether at night or during the day, at every hour and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is not recommended to perform phlebotomy on someone who has not reached the age of fourteen, and a woman should not be given bloodletting except in the fourth month until she reaches the age of seven, and those who have passed sixty years should not be subjected to bloodletting.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if anyone wants to be bloodlet for any reason, it is recommended that they have their intestines checked by a physician before the phlebotomy, if there is a movement in them, so that the veins do not release excess blood during the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are pure and do not cause harm to the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And those who are not bloodlet should not be given bloodletting if they have nausea, drunkenness, or have escaped from illness or intoxication until they have recovered from it, nor for hydropsy, and more that bloodletting is used appropriately with colic pain and vomiting, and abdominal, and multiple cases of gout and work and exercise of breakfasts or vigils and all causes that dissolve the virtue, whether physical or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And then consider the elimination of humors that cause this condition, if the abdomen is large, with food and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then, if there is no cause to prevent it, or if it is exercised by some exercise to thin out the abdomen.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the flebotomy of it in the chest, around the hour of terce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And perforate that the chest of that person is guarded on that day from all animal misfortunes, as we have said, such as anguish, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as we have said, such as labor and excessive pain, and joy, and similar things to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And to its seat, make it present the causes in the use of which customarily men have aromaticity and odor and balms and similar things according to their quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the flebotomist on a cushion that is put under or that of that person who should be flebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then remove their arm, and make an incision with the flageolet cautery on that area; and then tighten the bandage around it and wrap those wounds.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the stricture is cold, as it is not equal, or the stricture is superfluous, then prevent the flow of pus from the wound; or if it is a softening, and then prevent the body from moving completely.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then remove the stricture, so that the one who should be flageolet-cut makes an incision between their fingers where the veins are inflamed, and declare it to the feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the flageolet-cutter holds the flageolet-knife with a small amount of old oil properly; and places their hand on the index finger of the other arm over that vein, where the incision is to be made, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is set so that the veins are like a cord fleeing from the incision, and those that are full of blood when the flageolet-cutter pauses on that one, they are contracted by the flageolet-cutter, and if he does not touch the vein, and if he touches it, that is tight.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for that reason, the flagellant should be stopped and investigated in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then, if the vein is punctured in one place, you should apply pressure there; and if not, repeat this procedure in another location nearby, or on the affected area, if the location is not bleeding.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is abscessed, or the patient becomes worse, then you should leave it for a day or two, and do not apply any compresses, because forcing an abscess to open can cause more harm, or it may not be infected at all.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the flagellation if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the puncture is small and blood flows slowly, and you fear that it may not be enough of the desired amount, then repeat the flagellation in that area again, directly and accurately, and apply pressure on the puncture, because the location becomes abscessed in some people due to the application of compresses.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	If the patient is still in bed, do not touch them, as they may have a cause for not allowing it; and pause over that certain part of the oil bandage, which would help the body of the sick.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is best in this place to use oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, administer an oil bandage in all phlebotomy, which veins doctors prohibit from the body of the sick, and they make it with Tyrian silk and satin when placed over the one of those on the spot, where the sick is thinned and rotated when it is large.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess is generated in the place of phlebotomy, which occurs due to bad luck, and more so to that one who has not been bled but only with that blood, or in the insertion of the vein a little, and then you cover it, and pause over the spot with a sponge infused in water and salt, a slightly burnt one, and strengthen it for an hour, where it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it should be done close to the incision of that vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is any blackness or greenness in that place, do not do it; and if you want, place some cause of aloe and of myrrh dissolved, or some cause of sugar or honey or something similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And move the vegetable tumors and swellings that occur after lancing the abscess of the base.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And place your hand over that, and if you then apply softness to that, that swelling is bad and bad; and therefore guard yourself that you place something similar to it over that, which will greatly flow from the vein.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make an astringent in that place, so that the area is toughened, and then cure it with the other cure before it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it should be taken out from the wound to all people according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color that remains over the wound after it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the bone is black, then leave it inside until it is roasted; and similarly if you see it large, then leave it inside until it is thinned out; and similarly if it is sharp, then leave it inside until its sharpness is dulled.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if it is a case that is large and strong and has the need for extraction of bone in a prolonged period, then amplify the phlebotomy of the vein and the phlebotomist should be left-handed.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in that which is thin, do the opposite of that, and have it extracted in short periods, and let the wound be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of vein is that it be transverse section, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy saves from bone flow and from injury to nerves, and it is more praised and safer than second latitude and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in that which usually occurs syncope during phlebotomy, and have it treated with a small amount of infusion in the form of milk or of simple oximel; extract from the bone in three or four periods.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is a complexity of the face, then take a nostrum called fleubotomia to infuse in an essence of myrrh or in an essence of honey aromatized with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or in an aromatized essence and a pleasant odor.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if the nostrum fleubotomia causes sincopation, and its cause is due to a lack of one thing, then take some bread soaked in an essence of honey and a subtle odor; use aromaticity with an ale, and let it lie on his chest.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of sincopation for elimination.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to bring his arm and dissolve his second sin, then take the nostrum fleubotomia for elimination, as its virtue is free, which evacuates the small sins little by little, so it is according to the quantity of its virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	When one wants to perform the surgery on their arm, and they are lying on their left side, and their chest is strong, then do so around seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	When one wants to remove the intestine from the opposite side of the body where it declines, then do so on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When that chest in which the intestine has already been removed and is inflamed and causing high fever, then lie it on one side and place a great quantity of cold cloths on it, and increase the perception of the flebotomy; and place your hand over the thighs of the intestine, so that it does not die in the location of the syncope, for this is what happens when the flebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not do so when you want to remove the arm and evacuate the second intestine, as long as the orifices of the vein have not been closed and it has been difficult to remove from the intestine, that you push against this with great force and extend it too much, for this is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the left arm ready to be punctured secondly; or remain with that amount of acuity in the fleubotomi that is coagulated from the blood into the orifice of the vein; or pause over that of tyriaca alfarach, or sagzenea, and compress it lightly until the blood is out and stopped.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, leave it alone until the inflammation is sedated.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary to evacuate the blood again, and there is no excuse, then draw it from that location or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "funis del bras" is punctured in the location of the fusca or basilica, when it is not discovered or hidden, which are composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the puncture in that vein is that the patient introduces their hand into warm water until the puncture becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then apply strong pressure on that part of the bandage that is near the stricture; and then use a bistoury second the transverse small one, not latitudinally or according to the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And then make your incision wide and use your bistoury on that joint where you have made the incision.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if it is forbidden to let the sanctioned substance flow, then you should immerse your hand in cold water and let the sanctioned substance run into the water until you achieve your purpose.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	However, if you are in the days of summer, then you should be excused from immersing your hand in cold water, and instead place the body of the sanctioned substance in cold water in the winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the incision of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, since it does not have a pulse or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the incision of the heel of the foot is comparable to the maladies of the leg.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the fleam used on them is that you strengthen your hand or your arm, because you should hold it firmly, while the vein is inflated and demonstrated at once; and then apply the fleam transversely; and if you insert it too deeply, you will not feel anything in return.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And do not let your hand remain on the fleam, because it will cause damage to the nerves of those dissected parts of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then repeat your hand in the blood flow and let the blood run out in that place, because if you do not repeat it in the blood flow, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted according to the necessary quantity, then place salt and oil on the vein opening, so that it does not consolidate constantly; similarly, do the same in all straight lines.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The smell of the fleam used on that of your right hand is similar to that of the melon.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same in the clyster procedure as you did in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the advantage of the vein of the thigh in clyster is for those who have diseases in the part behind the groin, as well as diseases of the uterus and retention of menstruation, and diseases of ronhs and ulcers of thighs and legs, and similar diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the clyster in this case is that the patient puts his foot in warm water and makes pressure on the friction where the veins appear; and then he ties it above the ankle joint; and the place of the vein is apparent from the foot, and from there its branches extend to the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then clyster the widest branch or behind the leg from the foot to the knee, which is better and more healthy.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you clyster on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are behind that on the surface of the foot, and place your clyster above the one you would like to insert, as if you wanted to insert it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the bleeding stop.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	However, if the discharge of pus is prohibited; then you should wash the patient's foot in warm water and let the pus flow out through that opening which is to be evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the incision for the bleeding is made in the first stage, then wash the patient's foot in warm water and apply a poultice on that area which is salted; and do not fear the bad smell, but take care of the nerves as we have mentioned.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, make the poultice on the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic vein, the area is as we have mentioned, it is behind the calf of the thigh.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the benefit of the incision for bleeding is at the pain in the buttocks when it is for draining pus.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the incision for bleeding is that the patient enters into warm water, and quickly and strongly applies the bandage of the buttocks from the side of the thigh above the calf, which does not appear except by that.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	When it appears, then you should use the second needle of each type that is at your disposal and according to the transverse line, which is better; or incise it from the beginning or cut it from the side, where the location of the patient is healthy.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	It is often found in men and not in women; and if you find it, and it does not appear all at once, then use the second needle to pierce some part of it, and that which appears on the back of the foot near the inner ear and the annular.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and make the bone bleed as much as you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then remove the restriction and place your hand over the location of the needle insertion and strengthen the location, where it is usually healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of the indications and quality of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Indications are of four kinds, of corn, or of warts, or of a berry.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Indications are made in two ways: one of them is by incision and removal of bone, and the other is by incision only.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this incision that is made for scarification is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the incisions that are made for scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body, of which one is in the place where the incisions are placed, and the last part is on the crown; and the middle part is from two sides of the neck; and incisions below the mandible, behind the mouth; and incisions with spoons; and incisions with a lancet, and it is above the hollow of the buttocks; and incisions with two knives; and incisions with two forks; and incisions with two cauteries; and incisions with two cauteries.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And the incision does not extract blood from the small veins scattered in the meat, and for that reason, the value is not obtained for those, as it would be if it were done by phlebotomy; nor is there any concern that the incision should be made with fire or without fire in any malady caused by inflammation within the body.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If necessary, cause vomiting due to illness or continuously, administer it at all hours of the day and night, at the beginning and end of the month, and at some time during the month.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The reason for this is that men in which it is multiplied within a certain time before the indication for extraction of it by vomiting and atrophy in their own head gravity and soda; and of those in which atrophy occurs replacement and irritation in their face and in their head, and in their neck; and of those in which atrophy occurs prominently in their face and in their forehead and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and of those whose location of vomiting is changed; and of those in which their taste is multiplied; and of those in which their tongue is swollen and they spit out sanguineous matter; and of those in which their sleep is multiplied, and of those in which sanguineous matter occurs in their sleep and waking and dreams and other causes similar to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it occurs in any of those causes, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth toe, then command a blister to be made as soon as possible, preferably within two or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	However, if the blister is on the back of the neck, it is because when that occurs, it causes great pressure on the head and leads to that which is spilled at the temples; but more importantly, it indicates a need for complete evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this blister is in the location of the great toe of the foot.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not recommended to use that which is of complex origin, or in which there is a catarrh, as it gives great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore, it is not recommended to use those which are old, and in the heads of which there are illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But rather, it is recommended to use that which is continuously on the blister; and for that reason, it is advised that you command the blister maker to place a small piece of cotton over the parts behind, in order to prevent the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	May the vapor of alcohol be used in place of fleam for venipuncture of the femoral vein and basilic: and for that cause it confers asthma, and constriction of the chest, and separation of the sternum, and cough, and tumor.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And if the alcohol vapor is applied in a small amount, and it is paused there, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the vapor of alcohol confers the accidental pains in the head, and obtunds them, and prevents preoccupation, and pains in the teeth; and it is used for venipuncture of the basilic.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And if you command the one who applies the vapor not to press their hand during incision so that the artery is not injured and blood does not flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And vapor applied to the mouth confers alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar to those of the maladies that are in the mouth, and it is used for venipuncture of the artery that is in the lower lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	When a warm compress is made on the two flat spoons and applied to the back, it is done for the purpose of heat retention.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the warm compress made from the two flat spoons is greatly applied to the puncture of three veins, namely the basilic, femoral, and cephalic veins, which are all the main veins that run through the flesh, and those smaller veins that branch off from the other larger veins until they reach the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the warm compress not to proceed in incision, as the area is exposed to flesh, and then leave the nerves and arteries there.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a warm compress that is applied to the buttocks and applied to the hemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcers that are left behind.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And make sure that the warm compress is very large and made of wool, as the area requires strong drainage; and it should be soft and subtle, and it should be incised during incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	When the bedding is too soft and allows the body to sink in, it pulls the spine out of alignment, causing pain in the back, hips, and bladder; it provokes menstrual cramps, and causes pain in the buttocks and abdomen; it is similar to a lumbar puncture, a cystoscopy, and a cavitron.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, if the bedding is too hard and causes the entire body to become misaligned, it can lead to scoliosis in men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the hard bedding, the body is pulled towards the soft bedding of other cushions.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the bedding position is that it allows the body to be supported at the beginning and gradually adjusted for comfort, and do not prolong the bedding position, but rather pause it occasionally, and keep it comfortable, so that the humors can come to the location equally.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease doing that and continue until you see the location already red and swollen, and when the pain of the spine appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you should shave and scrape the skin layer by layer, and then consider the position of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that person who has thin skin, cover the area with a wound dressing and do not let it be exposed to the air, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the breather to blow air and make a layer, and facilitate the skin removal.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the sinus is too thick, cover it with two wound dressings, because in the first layer, the path of subtilization to the sinus and its moisture are found.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second layer, the acquired knowledge of the thick sinus extraction is found.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the sinus is too foul, make a thorough skin removal in the third layer to get rid of it.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the sinus layer by layer or a small amount, provide us with a skin removal.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a large sinus, make a thorough skin removal; and if we know that the sinus is thick, cover it with a prepared skin removal.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term for incision in which the depth of the throat is only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the person whose throat is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are straight, then the locations of the wounds should be more smooth, open, and resolved; if it is in the summer, use olive oil of aloe or olive oil of violent or olive oil of damask roses, or olive oil of chicken manure; and if it is in the winter, then use olive oil of nutmeg, or olive oil of lily, or olive oil of camomile, or of sandalwood, and similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick, foul, then use the oil of amber, or olive oil of balsamita, or olive oil of aloe, or olive oil of anethi, and similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the ventozador is of wide pores of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and the locations of the wounds should be washed with warm water or with fresh water of sulphur, or with water of chicken manure, or similar.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And of the one whose skin is of great moisture, wash his armpits with warm water or with a solution of myrtle and sumac and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And of the one whose excess is thick, wash his armpits with warm water or with a solution of sage, lavender, anise, or chamomile, and similar to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And let the armpit be kept clean after the bath; having hands that it be administered nearby the bath for an hour or two, and let it be covered nearby the armpit.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that must be done before phlebotomy to prepare for bleeding?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Let it be considered at the beginning: if the person to be bled or the one who will bleed is irritable and sweats on his skin sharp and inflamed, then let causes of cooling be taken, such as vinegar, warm water, lotion, julep, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And place their food and meat with a sharp knife, and chicken pieces, and cooked vegetables, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	Of that which has a bad complexion, take a tablespoon of bay leaves or bay leaves from the sea, and sumac, and mix it with some fragrant wine between old and new; and it is recommended that they use little water and food, and place their food and meat, canary, pigeon, small birds, and dove.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is recommended that on the day of ventozacio and fleubotomia, the water should be greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is recommended that some water be given to certain people at certain times with alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, or medicaments of musk, which is musked, or alcelita denant the ventozacio or denant fleubotomia or near, so that their main members are comforted and that their sickliness is subtilized; and it is not recommended that they take that scalfatz.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	When the incisions that are made for bleeding are placed on the forearm, over the heart and gout, over the navel, in the places of the joints, and on the broad part of the ankle, because these members do not suffer incision on themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those but to draw blood from the limb, such as a bloodletting cup on the breast in the case of intestinal bleeding; and we use that which dissolves the viscous fluid inside the member, such as a cloth over the belly and navel; because that rarefies the member and draws out the blood that resolves the viscosity.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is already placed on the ribs when they occur in their inflammation or pneumonia, because by the virtue of bloodletting greatly relieves the inflammation and eradicates the pneumonia from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, when it is placed on the forearm and heart in those who are closed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these incisions are administered with a sharp instrument alone; and some wounds are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Some waters are administered full of tepid water in the diseases of the horse.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is why the windpipe is filled and becomes larger, it is either water alone or water in which certain herbs have been boiled appropriately.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The form of water administered by heat: the width of the opening of two fingers, according to what we have formed; and the quantity of the drug is the length of one palm; and it is in the side of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the most of it, the thread should be small according to the quantity that enters into it with a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of wax or citron, of large margins, lion, equal and smooth so that it does not damage the member in its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it should be at the side of it, a transverse wax or iron, on which is placed the candle by the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this water should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and the smaller amount of it according to the diseases and the state of that who uses it with that.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the winds of infants are different from the winds of young people and fat women.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of applying this wind to the member is that it extends the muscle with a good amount of wood fire decently by a small candle of wax, and place it on the edge of the longitudinal vertebra in the middle of the location of the wind, so that the fire is lit around the part to prevent the body of the patient from being burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Then place it on the member of the patient and say the word we mentioned, as long as when we have the winds and do not need to open the door and let the steam pass over that tract, then the wind will soon be dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then massage the muscle according to its manner, and repeat that if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In the wind that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no longitudinal vertebra or tract, and it is not administered but filled with water, and placed on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is how it looks: And this winding, the more it is long, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in any member except in the members where it is not possible to position windings, such as the gums and similar parts; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the nose and similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting in the waters of dirty baths.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then lay them down in the day and at night in dirty water until they are famished, and that no cause remains in their stomachs; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with bleeding and windings; and then rub the patient's member before it becomes red; and then place cushions over it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to apply the winding to the place, it is better in young people.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, then wash the area with warm water and a lot of it; and rub and squeeze it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body is prolonged and the blood vessels are exposed, then place a cloth soaked in cold water over it and place your hand on top to absorb the runoff.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the wound is multiplying, then powder it with tri-sulfate of vitriol or similar substances according to the causes of styptics until the wound is opened; or place the most crushed fava beans on the wound and leave them until the beans stick to the wound, and then open the wound.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, change the blood vessels when possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the blood vessels are prohibited from suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the places where blood can be drawn; and place your hand on top to prevent blood from flowing out.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to vomit, sprinkle some powdered aloe trimmings, salt, or ashes on those parts, and they will soon vomit.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Now begins the text of the fourth part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and of accidental displacement of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh son, be wise and know that many foolish doctors and laymen and those who do not regularly read the books of the ancients or understand one letter of them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason this method of the sciences in our land is hidden; and I do not have it at present, but I have been obliged to do so at some time; and I have not admitted anything that follows, but only after a long reading of the books of the ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science of those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And therefore direct yourself to experiment and study in the length of your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described all of this in this chapter, which includes the main knowledge and the best experiment; because it is used to improve your understanding and to relieve you of the burden of prolongation; and it is used to conclude the improvement; and it is shown in the end of the declaration; and it is formed into several forms of instruments that are administered in that, as it is done by addition of declaration, such as has been done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from the essence of bone fractures, from those of which previous mention is necessary before we begin the remembrance of the broken and varied limbs of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	So that we can say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the speech; and the chapters to which they refer, for which in the beginning it is said by the craftsmen and at the station on the truth of those; so it is you and those who know or learn this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so it is said that when something happens to someone with a fracture or dislocation or twist or hernia, it is customary at the beginning to apply leeches or leeching to that place, or any other means, if no cause prevents, as long as they do not weaken the effectiveness of the treatment, or if the one who is affected is elderly and weak, or if it is a time of great heat, or of great cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with eating fresh herbs and small pieces of meat from pigeons and crab; and avoid large pieces of meat and filling up on foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure of preventing an abscess, and if you do not fear the effusion of matter into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their usual diet first, which is customary for them.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so when the bone begins to be restored, it is customary for the patient to be fed on nutritious foods that are heavy and thick in them, such as bread made from wheat flour, water, rice, beans, cheese, fresh meat, and similar heavy foods, and this regimen is made by coagulation of fracture more gently and longer.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	When bones are broken in men who are in their prime and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to remain continuous and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they remain continuous and consolidated according to their nature for all time due to the dryness of those members, and their continuity and consolidation is achieved at the end of the treatment, just like the bones of small animals.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and absorbs over the broken bone from all parts, similar to glue in which it swells and strengthens that part which is thus conglutinated and united, until the end of fortitude and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, until some cause does not prevent its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason, it is necessary to place the bandages of the patient, bandages in which there is gravity and viscosity and heaviness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	There is great variety of fracture according to the difference of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you should know that the types of fracture vary according to the difference of the members, for a fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the skull; and the fracture of the ribs is different from the fracture of the arm; and similarly all other members are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have remembered the memory of all types of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Great variety of fractures in itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of fracture of the bone are varied in their own way; for some fractures are made curved another than those that happen in the stars; and some are made according to the length of the bone: and some fractures of the leg, star, and addition proceeding and not proceeding, as it is made in the pen when it is prepared to write, and the fracture is in the plate and disruption in the skull, and the small fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And to each type there is a proper torture in the restoration of it according to what will come to memory of it in its own places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Great swelling of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	For that reason, this is known as a bone fracture: the deformity of it, and from that prominence to the sensation, and when you feel that at your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore, if there is no deformity apparent in the location and it is not done by touching the bone with your finger when you touch the patient's agitation and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is deformity or a small crack, and you do not know if your hand is touching that or the compression of all; place something over it from the medicines of which you remember at that moment that is appropriate to the location; and make it straight by subtle restriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you will know that the location when it is bent and not split into two or another thing like that does not occur in its entirety, as it remains all the part of the body; therefore, place something over it from your hour to rectify the deformity that occurs after it.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If an abscess occurs at that location, leave it open for several days until the abscess ceases; then apply a poultice made of equal parts of linen and mustard according to your ability and discretion.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	You should know that the healing of the wound and its suppuration is less urgent than the treatment of the underlying condition that caused it.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then apply a strong poultice when the memory of the wound returns.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the underlying condition is severe, then it may be necessary to extend the affected member by two parts, such as the thigh or foot; or use a splint if the member is small; or use two cords or one cord and a splint.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place your hand in the position that you use to hold the member in its natural location, while the extended parts of the member are supported, then perforate those additions with a needle and sew them according to your ability and discretion.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful not to cause harm to the patient during your operation or any injury; and perforate according to your strength so that you apply the bandage evenly on both sides in the best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And if at that hour you touch your hand to that place, and if you see any different cause here, correct it and balance it with the amount of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And if you apply excessive extension and compression, as foolish surgeons do when they move too much, it can cause the formation of an abscess due to their operation, or it can cause contraction in the member, as we have seen due to their excessive movements.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then attach, equal and proper operation and structure of that member, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make him understand that it should not cause him pain in the hour of his vigils and sleep, and observe his rotation and agitation, and devise his evacuation, and deviate all his movements to all his virtue; and wait until the position of the member is a position in which the pain is secure, because when it is in the disposition of the position of the member, that causes why it causes pain; therefore cover that to another disposition of that in which he does not feel pain; and guard that that position of him that one is straight and equal, so that the member does not suffer tortuosity when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the fracture of the limb depends on what I recommend; since you know that broken limbs vary in their appearance, size, and shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small like the arm and the finger and similar to those, it is customary to cover them with very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those that are large like the cushion or the back, cover them with a thick and durable cloth, because the thinness of the cloth connects the large limb and strengthens it equally, in order that no macula be introduced.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, with your equal evacuation, place a bandage conveniently on that fracture, above the location of the break, with three or four layers after the limb has bled; and strengthen your hand a little on the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then go to the most stable part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen it as much as possible without breaking your structure that you have strengthened the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then approach the location of the fracture with a bandage, and gradually soften the structure little by little, until you take out a large piece from the location.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other wound over the location with the first bandage, and approach the bandages to the part that is farthest from the fracture; and your operation should be in the structure of the bandage and in the softening of the second one that we have mentioned in the first bandage.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place your hand between the bandages of a lion or cloth that is equal to the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is tortuosity in it; and if not, do not place your hand in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place your hand on the other bandage, and gradually equalize it over these sharp bandages as soon as possible, if there is inflammation or abscess in the location; and then place your hand on that which secretes the abscess and that which reduces the inflammation; and leave it for several days; and then strengthen it over those.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And if the cane's handles are made of laurel wood, and be formed skillfully; or of pi; or of palm ramps; and let the width of each handle be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, make sure that the handle placed over that fracture is fatter and longer than the other handles, and let the length of the handle according to how it is placed on the member in magnitude and proportion; and strengthen the other end of the handle with another band according to your first structure; and let the other end be placed above the field decently according to what we have said about the structure, and that your structure is according to the location of the fracture, and the longer it is from the fracture, the looser the structure.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And make sure that the threads are made of thick and thin silk, and they should be of gold; and if the threads are thick, use them as I have seen in the operation of alcus fols placing the long threads of cord of gold twisted, and it is a great error when the structure is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	It is not advisable to use very thin needles, as you will not be able to hold them properly and may cause damage between one thread and another, and it is not desirable that there be any gap in the space between them.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the patient is lying on the extremities of the stakes near the restriction in those places, then place a soft cloth or woolen cloth over that area to prevent it from causing harm.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are accompanied by bruising, and sometimes disruption in the spine, and you will find memory in that one in the second singularity of the capital.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that all broken bones do not need to be straightened on the first day; this is because the bone, when it is large, does not need to have anything placed over it for several days or seven or more, according to your security of the occurrence of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the method of the plasters that the Ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and torsion.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Handmade device for the treatment of fractures, convenient for various complexities and mainly for women and children, which is placed over the affected area: do not apply heat or friction: take powder from ground wheat, and it is the flour that prevents the movement of the bone in the parts of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if it is like that, do not apply the bandage to the affected area, but crumble the charcoal from the fire, and place the compresses of the non-specific or subtle; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another device for the treatment of fractures and dislocations and sprains: recipe of asafetida, of lapis lazuli, of acacia, of enula, and myrrh, which is made from one-third millet flour, of all ants' eggs. x; of mugwort and aloe vera ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; all its crushed and ground and mixed with water or with charcoal from the fire if the complexity of the patient is scalded; and then use this bandage, which is of good composition and restores the broken bones more gently, and confers to many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of applying a plaster that helps with fractures and twists: take equal parts of mallow, marshmallow, acacia, and Armenian bole, and mix them together.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All of these are ground in a large mortar with contrition, and their crumbs, and their powders are mixed with water or egg white and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of applying a plaster to joints and separated bones at those locations, and for pain in those areas and fissures and fractures: take some linen cloth and immerse it in a mixture of vinegar and oil and place it on the location.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this plaster, there is no virtue of restoration, but rather for drawing out abscesses and expelling pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of applying a plaster that restores the broken: take some fig tree leaves and wild poppy leaves; grind them all together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of applying a plaster that is opened and administered for the restoration of broken bones and when you want to resolve the long-standing abscess: take some powdered aloe, camomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of eggs, all mixed together; grind them all and their powders with water, if the limb is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is bleeding, then apply a moist cloth or a wet cloth from it and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another way of making a more effective plaster for the recovery of the member: take the roots of althea and semen of lily, balm, melliot, majorana, violet flowers, camomile, all equal parts and ground; all is mixed with a moist or dry or weak wine, according to the quality of the member and the color of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	If you do not have wine in its free form that should be placed on the sixth member for its recovery, but a wax and oil cream is made; and it is recommended that it be melted between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	If it is seen that it should be placed on the sixth member for its recovery and the causes in which the dryness of little heat is similar to mirra, enses and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Hand plaster that comforts the injury and pain: recipe equal parts of honey, of cheese, of peeled man's skins or penis of a rabbit, and of aloe, and of salt; three handfuls of flour and two of beaten egg shells and its covering, and make it into a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount should be according to the type of wound that is being treated and appropriately disinfected; consider whether it does not cause pain or inflammation and if the bone is not broken, then do not leave it for more than a few days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if pain, inflammation or swelling occurs at the site, then remove it in that hour and place the plaster on it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and marine sponge of lion's humid sea, and submerge it in warm water, and let that wash the wound until the swelling stops and the pain is eased; then leave the member to rest for an hour; and place a poultice made of linen soaked in hot oil and rose oil on it, and leave it on for a night until you are sure of the abscess being healed, and that the inflammation of the member is reduced, and that the pain of it is eased.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then gently apply that thin structure and apply a small and not too strong bandage for your first constraint, and gently heal the area inside.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and the swelling and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents have already disappeared from everywhere, and if you need to apply bandages and constraints, then you should do so as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no harm has occurred to the member of those that we have said, then do not remove it for three days or four or five or six; and some wait until twenty days after you have appeared by the dislocation of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it settles on the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the constraint more than in your first constraint, and adjust it according to the increase of the food of the patient, after the reminder of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see that the location of the fracture has already dried up and become very hard, then know that the food should not reach that; and therefore apply that area with a thin cloth soaked in warm water for the entire duration that you have removed it; and this is all three days; and increase the constraint a little, and for this operation the food reaches the member, and it heals better.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	When those who call themselves bone setters of the broken limb when it is not restored to its original position, according to their custom, and when it is restored according to its curvature, they err in their operation, causing great fear, and if this is done incorrectly, it increases the ancient injuries and prolongs the time for healing.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	I have never seen anyone of them do that, so it is reasonable to assume that they should not do that.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter two: Of fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are varied, and their shapes are different, and their causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of space, which penetrates the skull, which is located behind the bones, just like it does in the bone, and for this reason, this type is called "ascial"; or the space enters a part of the bone, and enters the flesh of it without passing through the skin, and this type of fracture is called "absolute elevation".
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the extent of these two fractures is great or small, and whether the fracture is contracted or displaced; and the cause of this is a blow with a stick or a fall on stone, and similar circumstances.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is so deep that it approaches the periosteum which is next to the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the extent of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And whether the fracture is displaced in the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and for that reason this special type of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And if the fracture is caused by a fall or a blow with a stone, and similar circumstances, which causes some bone fragments to enter the bone parts, and it is made in the concave place where the same thing happened to the ribs when they were hit and their fragments entered the bone parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This is especially done in the bones of humans, such as their skulls.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these special fractures are caused by pressure from sharp objects, such as stakes separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you will find the cause of everything in that place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you will recognize all these special fractures by detection of those and by investigation of their attempts and the rotten flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And this special type of fracture is recognized by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and it is cleaned, and it is applied to the attempt, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider the initial symptoms of the patient, and if you see by the symptoms that it means manifestly by fever, such as vomiting of choler, extension, loss of understanding, abscess of the throat, sincope, acute fever, and inflammation of the glands and swelling of those, and similar to their symptoms in major dispositions, these are not cured.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see symptoms that do not correspond to your health, then you should begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	When this cause occurs, if it has come to your hand in the beginning as it is usually done and it is in the days of winter, then you should study in the preparation of the bone during the day on the fourteenth, completely prepared.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then you should prepare the bone on the seventh day, having that which has been left behind the bone is corrupted by the pancreas, and that accidents may occur due to the incidents we have encountered.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the pancreas, covering the brain, and is small and atrophied, then you should incise the divided and atrophied part, according to what I have encountered.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you raise the head of the patient, and discover over the bone according to custom and your ability according to the figure of the wound, and that it is lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if an accident occurs to you in the detection of the bone, flow of pus or abscess cautiously, then you should stop at the patient's side and that which has been left behind, and that you fill the place of cloths infused with vinegar and olive oil, and make a new covering of the wound until the abscess is sedated, and be sure of flowing pus; and then begin in the circumference of the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first method is that you insert the needle straight through, and this is the form of it: And then administer another needle a bit wider than the first; and this is the form of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then widen the needle more than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should have different needles of various widths, some wider than others; and some shorter than the others and sharp at the ends of their extremities, and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease for percussion on the needle to prevent the head from hitting and breaking it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then make sure to pierce it in the circumference of it, giving that you administer the needles with the shallow-prongs, which are called taravells not-deepening.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And those are not called anything else but that they do not penetrate the end of the bone from where it is approached, so that the taravel has a rounded extremity or margin over it, similar to a margin or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the density of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take from these needles a large number of those that suit each bone, until it is present in all tests of the brain, the end of which should be sharp, the quantity in length and brevity according to the quantity of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of needles: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the needle on the bone and rotate it along the cracks until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the needle to another location, and pause where the thickness of the bone or around that area.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert the thinnest scissors you can find between each crack of the bone, and do it as gently as possible, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause to damage the things that have appeared at that point, such as fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be sure to guard against any cause that the scissors touch the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so, after you have circumnavigated the bones and separated the flesh if it continues to be attached, extract that, covering it with a cloth that is rough and uneven like the roughness of those bones, but rather more thin and more delicate than other scissors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there is any small fracture of the bones, then take that which you have from the instruments; and apply it to the wound to cure the wound with linens and find those that we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other method of operation is long and frightening, which is said to be very dangerous; and this is the word about it: it is necessary for you at the beginning that you discover the part of the bone in which the fracture is most severe and most manifest, before you have discovered that part and placed it behind the end of this slow and light scissors, which is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the rounded part is lion and does not cut into any cause, and the sharp part is of the same length as the other, as often; because the rounded part should be adjusted to the flesh with the face of the sharp part cutting into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then, approach the incision with a small blunt instrument until you have completely cut through the bone, and make sure the intestine does not fall into the wound that you are afraid of in any way, and if the physician was the most skilled of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, if he was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If there is any cause attached to the intestine in those places of the bone, then cut that one with the lens-shaped instrument at the end of the incision, and release that one with ease, which is released from its damage and its fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the intestine, and that which is cut or stuck to the bone is the surface of it, and is rough and subtle, then cover that roughness and remove those subtleties with a fine razor that you have prepared from various quantities so that you can administer them in the most convenient place for them and the right one of those second that you lost your operation on that bone broken and the figure of it.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you should administer the most dilute of those remedies, which you used at the beginning, and then use it gradually from the least subtle part of it, and do not cease to do so until you reach administering the thinnest of all those remedies.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In all other small fractures of the bones and thin fractures, you should administer treatment according to what you have lost for its correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is not caused by all those that have been studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And it is based on what we have shown in large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the wound is closed when you remove the bones, then you should take cloth of the same amount as the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled, and soak it in vinegar and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth, doing this as gently as possible without causing pain to the patient, and then administer a thin layer of liniment, and do not press it except for the amount that the wound has, only until it is healed.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that patient in the care of this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess's safety; and then remove it and then administer medicines that are excessively dry, such as linseed and flour of eggs, and powder of earthworms and aristolochia, and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And if you make these medicines into powder that is ground on the surface, as they are dry; and generally, administer all of this medicine of property that it is to remove and not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard yourself second that the wound in your cure is not net; and it is not in the surdity of eggs or other; nor do you allow to add virulence to it; because when it is adjusted on the pannicula of the brain, corromp that and poorly that, and accideys on the patient that malice maligna.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And accideys in the cavity of the head, as from there the bone is formed and more when it is thinned the cure of it, and it is black on the surface of it; and then consider that if it happens to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is paralytic.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If no black magic occurs but rather medical treatment that is placed above, and it is due to the power of that treatment that causes the black magic, then cover that part with melted honey and four parts of roasted oil, and place a cloth on those lines, and place that over the affected area; and cure that with the specific cures that are appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the repair of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You should know that the nose is not broken into two parts but rather four parts, somewhat similar, or one of those some veins, because in it there are two bones, the part that is left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, and it does not affect it only the atrocity and tortuosity and sinus.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of it is broken, then cover that part with the same small bone in its nose, and equalize that fracture by using the same indicating instrument, and the same pointed instrument, until it returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for your own convenience, and be careful not to cause harm to the patient during the operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not allow for a proper view, then cover that part with a small bandage.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the same thing.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And cover the wound with a bandage on the first day after the fracture, if possible; otherwise, apply the seventh or tenth degree of the healing ointment.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or place two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and it should be large enough to fill the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And tell the ancient healers that the splints should be covered in bandage, and they should be changed every day, but I have not seen this; however, it is recommended that the piece should be covered with a piece of cloth soaked in honey and powdered mold; and after the bone is set and the cartilage is strengthened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Sometimes, a tube should be inserted into the nose, in place of the throat, without any other cloth than a piece of linen from the lion; and if the fracture of the nose is very violent, and the patient is not prohibited from inspiring.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; if you want to do it, do so, and if you want to do it, do so.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another tube accidentally sticks to the nose, apply a plaster made of cerate or of a decoction of willow bark and rose oil, or of diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	However, if no tube accidentally sticks to the nose, then cover it with a plaster made of powdered sizami and powdered chalk from the album of cow's milk; and place your hand over the lion's mouth, and do not let the nose be touched by any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	However, if the bones of the nose are fractured slightly or crushed, then cover them with a plaster made of powdered sizami and powdered chalk from the album of cow's milk; and extract those with instruments that are suitable for those; and apply this plaster to the wound, and heal it with what encases and consolidates, and with what plasters are suitable.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If the patient has difficulty breathing due to a blockage in their nose, then apply pressure and administer a tube of medicine through it to clear the obstruction.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	If the jaw is broken and the fracture is not painful, then check if the fracture is only deformed and not completely separated or bent at the angles, in which case it can be straightened.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is in the middle of the jaw, then introduce the index finger on the left side of the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, then introduce the index finger on the right side of the patient's mouth; and push against that softness of the fracture with your other hand from the deformed part of the bone; and gradually equalize it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jawbone is already separated into two parts, then apply traction to both parts in a straight line until it is possible to equalize them.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a disruption of teeth to the point of breaking, then strengthen those that you hope will remain as gold or silver or cloth; and place a piece of cloth over the broken jaw, and place a doubled-over cloth over it, and place a large sturdy sheet carefully made, or a weight equal to the length of the jaw; and hold it above the second according to what you have prepared the ligature of it and what is appropriate for its application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be at ease, and place a cooling drink for their feverish lions (thirst).
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then on the third day, take it off and remove that; and correct what was already altered from it and apply this to the powder of moli, album of egg, or flour of cheese, before you have removed the cotton from it, and place a lion's wool over the application.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then when that paste is applied and the bone's position is not altered, leave it until it is healed and strong; because this fracture takes three weeks to heal.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another incident occurs to the abscess, then administer that which we have said in the treatment of it until it is healed, and let that abscess remain.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is displaced, then consider whether the bone is separated or just shifted; then you should thinly apply that which is appropriate for removing those from the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the openings of the wound are narrow, then you should enlarge them with a bistoury according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have removed those shifted parts, and if any remain, then if the wound openings are wide, close them; but if not, place one of the appropriate pastes on it and cover it until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the scapula when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The scapula is broken at the part where it meets the ribs, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts that do not match; and it is easier to restore it; or if there are any mismatches in the matching, it is difficult to restore it; or if the fracture is completely healed.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is completely healed, is that you make two assistants, so that one holds the helper and follows the broken scapula, and the other stretches the neck to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then equalize the fracture with the ribs until it is in the second shape of its original form, and not in the prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then cover it with a cloth or wool, and its size should be according to the amount of your needs; extend and elevate the scapula and tie the bandage inside your hand until the fracture is in its original form.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot pull the tip of the scapula to the parts forward, in order to reach the prostate, then have the patient lie on their back, and place a large cushion over their chest.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant lifts the muscle of the chest to the parts behind, until the bone of the scapula is raised to where it is in the prostate, and then you straighten the fracture and level it with the two ribs called the first.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	However, if you feel any sharpness or pain in the scapula and its surrounding area, then do so over that and remove those sharpnesses to relieve the pain.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is held in the bone, then you should make an incision in that area with one of the scissors that you have prepared for this, after having removed the scapula the instrument that serves as a cipher; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and this is the shape of it:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon, the concavity of which is like this; and its width should be according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the thickness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of the operation should be as long as possible; there should be two extremities present, with one being wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the bone from the shoulder is wide, and it is safe to sew it up, then adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is narrow, or you fear infection, then fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the amount of the wound's incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if infection occurs, then apply a poultice with vinegar and oil on it, and place it over the affected area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the structure of the bone when it is wounded and cut be that you place a poultice made of flour of wheat and egg on it, and place it over the shoulder bone, and then place the sphere behind the tumor of the patient, if necessary, and then take humidified cotton, which is long enough to cover the area, and has a width of one palm or more; and then place powdered duplicates on the poultice and the sphere; and then place a thin tablecloth of silk with a width of three fingers and similar length; and then wrap that in cloth, and then place that cloth with the tablecloth over the location of the fracture; and then place humidified cotton there as it is needed, and roll it around the neck of the patient and behind the tumor of the patient, and reduce it to cover all parts, and when the structure of the fracture descends, and that is what is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And even if the bone above the broken bone is not displaced; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the bandage is softened or you remove the splint, then you straighten it again and strengthen the ligament.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's pillow on their shoulder, and place another pillow behind their back to support their back when they are lying down in bed; so that the helper can be raised to the side of the patient, and thus the fracture of the furcula is raised by elevation of the muscle; or the arm of the patient is placed on the shoulder of the helper.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage unless there is an abscess in the place or after twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen the surface of the patient at that time, and adjust it in the structure and restore it, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the furcula has coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some weeks are made in men of that time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the Restoration of a Broken Shoulder Joint.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A splint is broken in the wrong place and not at the fracture site, but on its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the place of the fracture is broken — and it is broken in the wrong place — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, prepare the splint and reduce it to its natural shape in any way that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place powdered chalk and starch on the fracture site; and then place duplicated cloth pads; and then place a thin layer of table salt according to the amount of the splint or more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the layer is concave in any of the places of the splint, then you should level that concavity with starch, and then place the layer according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then apply strength above the wound with a bandage of reasonable length and firmly hold the layer until it does not move from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the cord in each day; and all the while it is softening, apply another bandage and tighten it as necessary to keep it in its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And turn the patient on their left side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spoon is restored in 10 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you should dissolve the bandage, and make sure that it is not from the bones of which the beginning was not feared nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the bone of the foot and put it under the skin, then you should cut on it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio of apostema caut if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The chest is broken in some places of it and that remains; but the extremities of it are not fractured and are crushed and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And when the foot is broken, it bends towards the parts inside and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting, and severe pain; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of the foot is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a cushion between their shoulder blades; then press on the muscles of the foot, adjust the ribs of the foot to the position of two fists, and gradually perform the operation of the foot and its equilibrium according to all possible and appropriate methods until it returns to its original shape.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place a poultice and bandage over the injured area on a soft cloth or bandage and cover it with a cloth; then gradually apply this to the broken bone so that it is not bruised; and when the swelling has subsided, strengthen the fracture with a splint; and consider the swelling throughout the day, and when it is softened, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to remove the scab or purulent matter, pain, or abscess that has occurred in that place, then you should take and remove that, and eradicate the plaster and correct what has occurred due to that hand's method of healing; and if you see that it is ready to be healed, then return the plaster, if necessary.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You should know that rib fractures do not occur except in the larger parts where they are located; and at their extremities, which are near the ribs, they do not occur except for those that are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And you should not be afraid of the pain of the patient, but rather examine it with the mentioned methods.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be as equal to the fracture as possible, according to the method mentioned, until it is completely healed, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the rib fracture is declining towards the internal parts, then the patient experiences severe pain and puncturing, similar to the puncturing felt by those who have coughed, and for that reason the bones are covered with a cloth; and they experience difficulty in handling, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ancients were skilled in that method with great care.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they said: cover the patient with blankets that generate inflammation and heat, so that the belly is full and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the external parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We should not do that in order to avoid causing an abscess, if it does not occur; and if it already occurs, then we help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they said to those who are above the wound that they should be covered with warmth and that they should suck out the strong; and it seems like reasoning, but however it is feared that the warmth will bring excess fluids to the area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they said to the patient: "Cover that place with wool that has been submerged in warm oil, and place powder between their ribs until it is full, as if you were wrapping them again after the second reddening; and then cure the patient with the care of pleurisy of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient experiences severe compression that they have not suffered before, and the bones puncture the bandage, place a covering over the patient, then cut open the wound, expose the broken rib, and place your hand over that instrument that keeps the cyphac, the rememoration of which is preceded, and cut through the bone to facilitate its removal.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, and treat that with ointments until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs, then cover and insert powder in warm oil and place it over the wound, and cure the patient with that which covers the abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him be placed on his left side while he sleeps until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter Nine.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the Restoration of Fracture of the Sacrum and Coccyx.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes, fractures occur in the vertebrae of the neck, and they are often accompanied by their attachment, and similarly to the sacrum and coccyx.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when such an accident happens to someone and you want to know whether they will be healed or not, consider this: if their bones are already softened and stupefied and dead and cannot be made firm again nor extended nor strengthened, and when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and feel no pain in them, then know that they are not healed, and in such cases the prognosis is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they feel pain in them when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see the spines of the neck like that and want to know if they are healed or not, then consider their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you see that they have already become soft, and if something happens to them in the groin, and when they lie on their back, they are unable to urinate and defecate, and some people turn over on their stomach and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and therefore do not treat them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If none of those things happen, the cause is better and less dangerous.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment of them is to prick the abscess with a needle that you place on the spine, or with a lancet dipped in warm oil or honey; place some bandages on it until the abscess is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the plasters that are comforting and existing, and strengthen it on that spot; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where the pain occurs until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If the wound on the bone has separated from it or for some other reason, then cover it with a bandage and keep that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitches; and then care for that wound until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the back of the bone is broken and it is at the end of the spine, then insert your finger into the anus on the other side of the body, and align the broken bone as much as possible; and then place a bandage and splint on it, if necessary, and strengthen that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel that the bone has been broken in it, then treat that wound and keep it; and care for that wound until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the wide.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the ribs are attached to each other, and if they break, the fracture is only in the extremities of those and are inserted in the length and decline to the parts below; and if the patient feels pain in that location and puncture, and the bed is surprised when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you place your hand over the area that is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in the extremity of it, then you equalize the second that is apparent to you by equality over the area that is similar to its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the long or that has already declined to the parts behind, then you make the patient lie on their belly above the area prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have equalized it, place a bandage on it, and place your hand on that star of the fust or of the codena, and press firmly on the area where you do not fear puncture of the fracture or removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And equalize the concavity with that which is placed in the area where that takes the splint according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their side or their back.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess occurs, then you cease from extending it and the restoration of it until the abscess is sedated, and place on it that which was previously prepared; and then return to the restoration of it, and press firmly on that which is covered.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If the bones in the spine are fractured or crushed, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the humerus.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Humerus is that which is between the ribs and the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you grip it at the point where the meat is thickest according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And if it is attached in two extremities of two pieces, then raise the location and hang it there.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a bed; and then remove the broken arm from the place where it meets the shoulder until it reaches the tip of the bone in the middle place where the curve of the bone is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then hang some heavy object or the nurse extends it to the parts behind; and then the doctor places the fracture together again, until the fracture returns as it was before.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other hand is that the patient be placed on their back and support their head with a pillow; and then command two assistants that one of them holds what is above the fracture, and the other holds the pus behind the patient; and each of them extends to their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be even stronger, then strengthen it on the fracture with the pillow and on the other pillow, and each of the two assistants extends their part.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then place half of the pillow on the cushion and the other behind the fracture in the hollow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is in the hollow, then place the pillow on that place and in that hollow.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	And equal to that with ease and work, and when it is applied according to what is covered and how it is applied well, then strengthen it if there is no risk of abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If a pustule occurs, leave the stricture in place until the seventh day, and place a soft bandage over it to keep it clean and dry until it heals, and then apply a new one.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of applying the bandage is to place plaster on the fracture, and then cover it with a clean cloth; then adjust the arm on the support, and place your hand on the affected muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Then place the cloth and bandage on the arm support to keep the arm in its proper position, unless there is any reason to prevent it from being broken.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And place the splint that is most close and strong among the others over the fracture; and place the width of the splint between each one, and make the length of the splints according to the fracture, adding three digits of each part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then apply bandage over the splints and the stricture that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is important that your structure over the location of the fracture is very straight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And if the fracture is more curved, then the structure is less straight.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you see the position of the splints and the structure as we have said at the time when you restore the member to its position, then do this.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear infection, then leave the structure and the splints inside for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the limb in all its parts for three days so that it does not occur in the location properly or inflamed; or it is prohibited for food to come to the member because of the disposition of excessive structure; and therefore, correct all this according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are sure that none of these causes will occur, then do not remove the ligature for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleep on their back, and their hands be above their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place your hand on the assistant's full belly, filled with wool equally, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not separated or dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, so correct that entirely with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And place the food of the patient according to the order we have given, unless the food is too strong in the beginning before it begins to strengthen; and later cover that food with a cloth.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	According to custom of the assistant and the nurse of the patient, it is that they should be strengthened in fourteen days; and later cover that food with a cloth, and wash it and administer it and medicate it with the remedies that correct that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is not healed after that time, then do not remove from that ligament and those splints within the days or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is composed of two bones, which are called two branches; one is small, and that is the one that is attached to the shoulder, and the other is large and that is the one that is attached behind the small one, from the part that is left.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the large or small intestine is punctured alone, or both are punctured together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small intestine is punctured above, its repair is more difficult, and its healing is more delayed.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the intestine is punctured below the fracture, its repair is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And it is even worse when two bones are punctured together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is punctured is the small intestine above, it is convenient for the doctor to facilitate its repair by placing a small extension in place as soon as possible.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large intestine is that which is punctured, then it is necessary to place a more forceful extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both intestines are punctured together, then it is necessary to place a much stronger extension.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary to place the extension of the hand over a cushion, and the palm of the hand above, and the fingers below, more than all the others mentioned, and the ear should be lower than the others mentioned, and the patient should be lying on a pillow.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion under their head or shoulder to prevent them from falling.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And the assistant should extend their arm on the side farthest from the injured hand or arm, and another assistant should do the same on the other side.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the doctor should set the bone back into place according to the best figure that can be found.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If there are any fractures in the bone, then carefully remove all the splinters to their original place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If there is a separate fracture that cannot be reunited by your hope of restoration, then do as described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is in a place that has already been treated, then take care of that treatment.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then apply a cloth soaked in rose oil and white wax, and make it thin yet strong, and place it over the subtle structure until the abscess is healed; and afterwards remove the cloth and apply a prepared plaster of powdered myrrh and clay, and place it on the strongest part of the fracture.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the number of ribs in the arm is variable, either it is broken into one piece or two pieces together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your hand on the location of the fracture as strongly and forcefully as possible, and when more of the restriction is above the fracture or below it, place the restriction a little softer than it was previously mentioned in the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft cloths, and not hard or sharp, and the best one is the one that is strengthened to be just right between being subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and the limb close to these days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there is any cause for which correction is necessary, such as the one that happens to the member, and then you should ensure that you place the member in a straight position before it stops that problem.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And do not hold the member too tightly until it recovers, and then return the restriction.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the contraction has already been softened and the bone has reunited and is like those, then straighten everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if nutrition is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive contraction, then gradually loosen that one and lay it aside for several days until it can receive nutrition, and strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not suffer from any of those causes that we have mentioned, then do not let it be removed within approximately 20 days or around those.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And have the patient's hand suspended by their skill of moving it, and let them sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 24 days, or the strong one is restored in 28 days, and all of this is according to the condition of the complications and the dispositions of skill.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of fracture of the wrist and those mentioned.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that the pinch of the knee and the knuckles of the fingers are prone to fracture, and do not occur except due to slight trauma.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When the patient has a fracture or slight trauma, have them lie down with their legs evenly extended, and place your hand on top of that extended leg.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And the assistant extends the broken bones, and the doctor aligns those that are misaligned with good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then have them place a poultice and bandage, unless there is no risk of abscess; and place your hand on top of that according to the size of the wound, and you have already wrapped that in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the wound is in the parts of the hand, and then make a similar shape of cloth, and command the patient to press that on their palm wound; and have it pressed firmly against the cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And have the cloth with the meat on it be lifted, so that the meat is applied to the palm; and press that according to what is suitable.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is at the parts deformed, then place your hand above and below the part, so that the wound is opened and straightened; and then place the structure, as if it is being rolled between the mentioned blades.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if the fracture occurs at one of the nuts of the mentioned bones, then if it is possible, secondly, place your hand on the palm and if you wish, place a small wedge to elevate the fracture and not make it crooked.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other mentioned bones, such as in the middle one, or in the index, or in the ear, or in the ring, then place your hand on the mentioned bone; or all of them continuously, and it is better; or place a small wedge above, as we have said in the wrist.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and place it, the disposition of abscess careful and opposite — to that operation — to that which covers when any cause of those occurs, according to what is related about it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the restoration of the bone fracture of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh are broken and are declared to be second-degree when they are converted to the part that is most painful.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done by applying a bandage over the fracture and another bandage under the fracture, and the patient lies on their stomach and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the healer extends the bandage to its full length according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is proposed to the top of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed at the back to the part of the femur, so that the extension can be in front, and the other bandage under the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the fracture is proposed to the top of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed at the front, and the extension to the parts behind.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor should place his hand under the affected bone and gently push it back into its natural position, so that it is joined by a good joint; then apply a poultice and bandage, unless the member has an abscess.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if the abscess is in that member, then leave it for several days until the abscess has drained, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage for that member should be made like this: cover the fracture with a hard bend, fold it twice or three times, and remove any excess; then place the cushion under the calf and the back of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And introduce a long, thin piece of cloth between the thigh and the cushion, and let the ends of the cloth go through the two parts on the side that is more accessible; then roll it over the cushion and thigh to cover any excess from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place your hand on the thigh in the location of that fracture, and place a splint on the bone of the cushion.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the empty spaces between the chest and the cushion with many cloths, to prevent the contraction from coagulating.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin the strong contraction from above over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as much as you extend the layer of the fracture location, your contraction should be smaller and looser and wetter.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend both ends of the strip to the parts that reach the cavity of the foot, and strengthen the other end of the strip with the other part in order that the layer does not remain in its own location.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then lay the contraction over that, so that none of those things happen to the member: corrosion, abscess, inflammation, and similar things; and if any of those things happen, then count yourself as undone from it, and rectify what happened immediately, according to what we have said above.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a bone that presses on the bone that you are putting in place, then try to equalize it as much as possible; and if not, do so on it and return it, and cure what follows from the memory of when it was healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Some splints are strengthened to this fracture of the thigh bone, which are adjusted to its shape, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of this fracture, do not cause the patient to become paralyzed; and if it is restored alone, another cushion should be applied on the other leg, as it is necessary for him to quickly regain movement.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the thigh bone is strengthened in 10 days or a few more or a few months, and all of this depends on the diversity of the conditions and the other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the humerus bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that the fracture of the humerus bone occurs in the arm, but it does not affect the surrounding muscles.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	And if it does affect the fracture, it is only a crack or tear in its parts, and this is a minor or major injury, and over this, everything is based on sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it should be equal to what was broken from the parts of it with the mentioned enterings that are aggregated and joined as much as possible for equality, ease, and convenience and making.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then place a poultice and place it over that round stone, if necessary for that one; and strengthen above the stricture to that convenience.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other fractures, including the abscess cautery and similar to those so that it is opposed to all accidents that are convenient for that one until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the ribs there are two bones of which one is large, and it is called the name of the rib; and the other is thin, and it is called the clavicle.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And depending on the type of fracture that occurs in those two bones of the arm, and for that one, the restoration of it is made equally, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If two bones are fractured together, the cushion is turned to all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the more delicate bone is fractured, the cushion is turned to the denant parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the larger bone is fractured, then leave that one behind, and those are causes that you have not yet understood.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equality, and ligature of the splints according to that equality.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the bone is not healing due to lack of strength, then the extension should be less and looser, and it will help your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the arm, there is a cause for operation when you equalize the splints and complete the entire operation, then take weights of lead that are placed behind the causes that are placed on the palms; attach them to those that are small groceries, and not from the hands, and be the longest of those according to the longest of the arm, and the one closest to the elbow.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each in two blankets of appropriate length, and place one over the part of the bed on one side and the other on the other side, and the end under the lowest part of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the three blankets in three places of the bed's extremities and at the middle, so that this structure prevents the bed from tilting to the right and left, and it is well-positioned.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then a wooden board of appropriate length is placed on the bed; and it is placed under the bed to support it.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially be careful that you do this in fracture, and when it is properly placed.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the bed each day and study it for any signs of worsening, and guard it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and if something happens that indicates that it is not healing, then stop doing what you are doing until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot and those mentioned.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The talus bone does not always have fracture; rather, some fractures occur in the bones of the foot; and in those mentioned, few fractures occur, and they do not happen to them but only in certain positions.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot have fracture and sometimes those bones are lifted above themselves between them, then place the patient on his back prepared on the ground as if he were walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place one foot on top of that which is lifted above those bones, and press them, and equalize them until they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then place a poultice and a bandage above, and place a small table under the belly of the patient with two flat surfaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that bandage to the leg structure below, because you have wrapped it with cloth and other causes of which it is in need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And if three or four days pass, then you will remove the bandage, where you will find the bones equalized, or they are broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is as follows.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If the patient's toes are curled, straighten them and place them in a natural position, and then gently stretch them and guide them back to their original position.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place your hand along the length of the curled toe, and put a bandage on it; then move the table with this one that you have recommended, and tighten the bandage properly.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If the toe is curled more than two or three, then place your hand on each of these toes, wrapped in a lion-skin cloth, and tighten the table at the lowest part of the foot, and have one of the ends of the table over the belly of the foot so that it holds well.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you to not forget that you should consider all the causes that were told to you in other cases of accidents that we have mentioned; and pause at any accident that occurs.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the nose of the woman and the bone of the shinbone and the ankle of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the woman's cervix is trapped, then perform a cesarean section in the lower abdomen, and then gently place it on the back of the belly, and hold it there.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife should pull the woman's cervix out, and do so with great care; and then the woman should be shaken, and her back raised little by little, until all of that is done carefully and the trapped bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powder on her back, and when she needs to urinate, gently turn her on her side and remove the urine, and then return her to her original position, and replace the first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Do this for seven days or around that time, until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take an ox's bladder and strengthen it over the wound of the woman with a catheter; and inflate the entire bladder into the woman's womb, and then gently blow into the catheter until the bladder is fully inflated inside the womb, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to fill it with cotton and linen for several days as recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the bones of the fingers of a man or woman are fractured, then apply in the restoration and drilling of that which we have recommended for the bone of the leg.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is drilled should not be hidden in these nearby fractures and that does not occur, especially to him who has some study and uses and understands this my free hand; because that fracture means to you in the major dispositions via drilling in the restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the wound of the man when it is fractured, take guarguamela of gold, and put the wound in that; and place your hand over it wrapped in cloth, and wrap it, and let it be laid for three days or around those, and let it be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of bone fractures when they are infected.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the one who has suffered a fracture, and especially if the bone is large and as big as the bone of the thigh or the forearm, or similar to that, which you should be careful and use forceps as soon as the conditions for forceps are present.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the fracture is not complete, you should be careful to retain it in place, unless you powder it with three grains of sugar, if there is another cause.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	However, if an abscess occurs carefully, you should leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, before it has passed, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause more harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	However, if the fractured bone is projecting above the knee, you should be careful to reduce it, and equalize it with your hands, at your discretion and with as little extension as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not to your liking and the equilibrium of it does not match the size of your hands, then you reduce that to the size of your hands with this tool; which is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight inches, and the width of which is according to the extent of the wound; and for this reason, it is necessary for the doctor who uses these three or four to match the amount that is needed in the cure in all cases of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and it should be in the shape of the part to be treated, so that it is not folded during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have a sharp edge at which there is a margin on both ends; and the underside of it should be thick and the top of it should go into the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "labra volentz atelarem", so this is the name of the tool.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Because of which, it should be supported by a pillow at the end of its sharp edge, raised above the end of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push that one into a narrow space where the bone returns, and let it be equal to some balance.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then force the extremities of the fracture together between them, and if the extremity of that bone is thin, and you do not take it with the instrument for good reason, then you should insert the extremity of that bone into the place where the instrument has power.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone to all that we have recommended, then insert that part which should be with the scissors that we have mentioned; or saw that part in some way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then remove those parts that remain in the bone of sharpness and small cuts.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and the patient experiences great pain after the reduction, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do that which you confer upon the patient with great benefit.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is completed, which you do for the bone, and then submerge dressing in a tight black stiptic, and especially if it is in summer, and you do not place it on the wound or any other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not cause more pain and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stitches at the time of the bone's complementary restoration, and leave the wound open so that the bent part can be inserted with forceps and wrapped according to the amount of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to tear the wound over the fracture, as this was done by some doctors, and they caused harm on their patients' legs, making them dead or worse. This is dangerous.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the wound is larger, soft, and different from the fracture of other bones.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear those bad accidents that we have mentioned, and cause pain in that place, then do not place stitches over those stitches, but rather apply that bandage of hard cloth in place of stitches and press on those parts.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the wound begins to close after a day or two, which in that place generates pus, then remove the cloth that you placed over that and administer poultices, using those that we usually use as medicine for wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is convenient for you to remove the bandage and consider the pain in each day that matters and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and cover that member in such a way that the swelling runs from it to the parts behind to facilitate.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the pain lasts for several days and is not consolidated or discharged from it, then know that here are the remedies for the small ones to cover and seek the pain in order to test.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those remedies, those that remain separated and extracted, those that are not separated and put the member and make it painful, perforate you to insert those second that to you is possible.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain becomes purulent or putrid, it is a different kind of corruption and putrefaction, then cover that with one of those that are suitable for that cure which is preceded by the story in its own chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that in which you cover that the best service and you make present your foot: when the large ones are cut off, emerge over the member that is there with the bones of the body and the helper and similar to those of the large members, and do not assume attraction of it, nor the extraction of it that many things have happened per aquo the death; having left that inside which is greasy, because strong it will be for if you approach xx days or xxx; and then cure the pain if you see it, and if not leave that.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure of a node that occurs at the site of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Nodes often occur at the site of fracture healing, especially near joints, and are shaped like a member; and they strongly prevent the limb from performing its natural function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore consider if the node is recent and administers in those medicines that have stoptic properties such as aloe, senes, mirbane, serpacollo, acrassia, and similar to those; or you take some or all of them, and confirms those as a stoptic, or album of honey, or vinegar, and place that over the node in a cloth, and bind it over the node for good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And do not apply too much pressure that it does not dislodge the node for several days; and remove it and apply another, until the node is reduced; or strengthen on that layer of lead descentment, which lead has the property of retaining all that is applied in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the joint has already become hard and narrow and necessarily causes pain in that way, then cut it along the most prominent part of it, and scrape off the excess and inflamed parts, or remove those with a sharp instrument before they become ulcerated; and cure it within the time that it becomes healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When a fracture is restored and brought back to its original shape, but the member does not return to its natural position.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture of the bone is restored, and the member returns to its original shape, but it is not done for many reasons: one of which is the lack of solution of the ligaments and tendons of that part, made not according to its natural course; or because there is an excess of stricture of the ligaments before the nutrient can reach the member; or because of excessive embrocation; or because of superfluous movement not in its proper time; or because of weakness in the body of the patient and because of its debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to make the patient lie down on their back and keep them there until the swelling has subsided; and administer baths, and apply compresses of figs and lettuce on it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice draws out any remaining nourishment, or continues to bring warm water through it, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the treatment of broken bones that have been restored improperly and prevent surgery on them for this reason.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When an injury occurs to a member that has already been restored, it is necessary to correct the deformity and swelling of the broken bone and its nodosity, and to shape it into the form of the limb, but if the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, at that time you should not receive the word of that person who exists that that member is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But if many foolish doctors and restorers have done this on our earth; and this operation is very blameworthy, causing great fear to the patient, which is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the limping and stiffness are recent, then it is recommended to apply a softening lotion containing the mollifying herbs such as elderflowers and rue, and melilot, and similar ones; and this should be made into an ointment like diascoral well prepared; or it should be made of the pounded root of elderflower and be mixed with grey gualine or oil of camphor, and this should be applied to the affected area; or it should be made of soft fatty substances and be rubbed into the skin of a columbine, and similar ones like those of medicines that are named consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some vinegar is dissolved in light friction with the wettest ones, and this should be administered to move the member in all parts at all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the twisting has already become severe and is made strong and converted into a stone and provokes the need for treatment with iron, then it is recommended to apply the pus under the skin and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and to scrape off any excess from the stiffness of that meat with subtle surgical knives, and this should be administered to facilitate movement in that area.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is an injury to one of the joints of the body, which prevents movement, distorts the shape of the limb, and causes severe pain and great injuries on the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when an injury occurs in a dislocation, it is immediately necessary to reduce it as soon as possible, and not to delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very painful, and in that case, reducing the dislocation is difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And to prevent this, it is necessary that the limb not be overstretched or extended in the hour of inflammation, because swelling causes spasms and slow pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When that happens, it is necessary to approach the patient's bedside and allow the swelling to subside before reducing the joint; then apply heat to the limb with hot water and oil, and reduce the joint as easily as possible.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all the limb should be treated with the oil that will bring its memory back to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the capital letters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the hip bone, enter into the part that was just left.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24:
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Cure for dislocation of the jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated jaws that are not tart; and the dislocation of the other is made in one of two ways: either they are reinserted into their places by a little removal, and are slightly molded; or they are completely dislocated and completed, until they are molded at the part of the joint where the saliva of the patient flows out, and they cannot hold that nor close their mouth, and the tongue of them is wrapped in their palate.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of it is slight, then return to the greater positions as if by a slight cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	When the dislocation is complete and completed, then cover that it be administered reduction of it more slowly, and not be delayed for too long.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the patient's head, and insert the doctor's finger in the patient's mouth, on the side of the dislocation of the jaw, inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers equally, and command the patient to stop their jaws and release those that are in each part; and the doctor should equalize the jaw and push it back into place before it returns to its original position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are frequently dislocated, then administer evaporated water and oil, until it is easy to reduce both and does not delay the reduction of both, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they are reduced and equalized, and the patient's mouth is closed and not molded, then place something soft on those wounds with wax, and make it from cera and oil, to facilitate movement of the jaw.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And the patient's body should be lying on their side, with the head between two pillows, so that it does not press against the back or left side; and do not force any cause; having the same view, use a lion's tongue, until when the pain is relieved and the jaws are unlocked, then turn them to their will.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with ease, and do not force the opening of the mouth for food, drink, and breathing, until the jaw is unlocked and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws at any hour and they are not converted to their usual places, then apply cold compresses and frequent fever, and strong heat is applied to the patient's belly, and strong heat and vomiting pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see that, know that it is fatal; and those who have that happen to them die within a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	The reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	Furcula is not dislocated from the back due to its connection with the chest; and some vertebrae are dislocated at the front, and that is felt as pain.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then cover the area with your hand using strong pressure, and it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then place a poultice and powders on that area and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The extremity of that which is connected to the body and continues with that, is not dislocated on any day; however, it should be reduced and splinted according to what we have said and according to what is available to you.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then place a poultice, powders, and compression on that area, and command the patient to remain at rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the tip of the elbow to the opposite side.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the part above the muscle, and this is done quickly; and it is not dislocated at the parts behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the parts in front of the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is more commonly dislocated and deformed and stuck at the parts behind the elbow, and especially in those in which the meat is thin, it is easily dislocated; but in those in which there are many muscles, it is stuck out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And many people often suffer from contusion or bruising, and the muscle of which is inflamed with abscess, and it is known that it has been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, you should know that you are overburdened with it, and then proceed to the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	When it is known as dislocation when the parts behind are devastated; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you notice differences between them; and you feel in the head of the muscle concavity and behind the devastation, touching the head of the muscle like a bone, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to its usual position, nor move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you must press or pull, and you should feel a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of this is that the practitioner raises the patient's hand above the parts behind; and places their fingers under the devastation of the patient, and strengthens the joint in its usual position, and the practitioner raises the patient's hand, and extends it in front; and places it back gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return, and from the beginning of what caused the dislocation, several days later, the patient should be given an embrocation that softens and melts like if they were made of aloe, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back and supported underneath by a pillow made of wool that is equally between elevation and restriction, and the doctor places their hand on the sacrum, elevates the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it does not hang down, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not hang down, because at that moment they return to their place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and stand on the side of the other, and insert their muscle behind the titillus of the patient and lift the titillus of them to the parts above until the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below their belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is heavier, then cover them with something else that another cause should be suspended, so that it does not burden the other, because the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	When reduced alone by another method: place a long wooden stick on the ground, shaped like a mortar, not too thick or thin, and place it under the patient; then cover the patient's head with cloth lions, and the patient should stand along the length of the stick, and extend the hand of the other part to the parts behind the other part; and extend the other part's limbs for strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If it is difficult to reduce the joint by all the causes we have mentioned, then use this cure: and you should take a stick of the length of two spans, and its width of four fingers, and its thickness at the end of the handle in the form of a button:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	and then place a cloth lion on the head to prevent the stick from entering the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	and then place the stick under the patient's elbow, and extend the hand or arm over the stick between the parts behind; and tie the stick to the assistant and the arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then place one arm on a scale of the second level according to its height, and the hand should be extended to the parts behind, and the other thing should be suspended from the other part, as the joint is soon affected.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And if the instrument of the patient is completed according to each possible manner, and then cover it with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; and prepare an ointment of powdered myrrh and egg white on all the muscle, as it is rolled over, and then place the bandage behind the joint, as it is stretched decently; and roll the bandage over the ointment, and the hand of the patient should be attached to the neck of the patient, and let it be, and do not press the hand of the patient for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And cover the food of the patient little by little, as soon as the member is comfortable, because it is more beneficial for its cure.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be given more frequently in seven or five days and should be exercised with a movement; and if it is stopped and not softened, then it is already cured.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to moisture that has accumulated in it or for another reason, then apply a pointed cautery three times, according to what is said in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if everything has been done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandage and splint are reduced due to some swelling, and it is not healed and catheterized and cannot be raised to the parts above, then know that the nerves of which are at the top of the muscle, which have been incised or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of which is made, the hand and arm or the parts behind, reduction is made by impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And the other splint is applied in that place, and cure it within the time it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing is slow in the member and delayed in its movement, then use hot compresses until that gravity is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and if it is dislocated in all parts, especially at the part nearest to the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you when it is found behind the clothing or behind the touch according to any figure that is dislocated, and when you adjust the shoulder dislocated, if it is not adjusted, that is your declaration manifestly, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And if you see that the shoulder is dislocated, and reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes to the abscess cautery, because if you see the abscess cautery, the reduction is difficult, and not all is healed; and especially when it is at the back parts, because it is worse than all the other species of dislocations, and more painful, and more dangerous than the others, and can cause death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of the foot, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient should be extended in two directions, and the arm of the patient should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor should be on the side and below, and the finger should be applied to the joint at the base of the palm where it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is at the joints, then return it as if you were bending your arm at the elbow, until you strike the chest at the base of the palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And if two assistants are extending the arm, then hold it firmly with two assistants to prevent it from moving during extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then rotate the arm in all directions, so that it is wrapped in a rolled cloth or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint at the base of the palm, apply some oil to it so that it is one of those causes that help in the lubricity of the joint and facilitate its return.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then approach the reduction of the uterus that should be placed on that pad where there is astringency and execution with egg white, and it should be extracted from the stricture descending, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be dislocated; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you should dislocate the ligament of it and leave it there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strong enough, then you should reapply the plaster and ligament, and leave it there for several days until it is extracted; and then dislocate it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if an accident occurs to the joint during reduction, and its position is in movement, then administer moisture in baths and gentle friction, and compresses, until it is removed; or pause on the moved joint with a greasy cloth; and then it should be laid down, and left there for several days.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then place that there, and put that in the bath; and when dry, then you should rub the joint with a cool friction, and then repeat on the moved joint with a warm cloth, one day, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	When using a medicinal bath, ensure it is not too hot.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place your hand on the wound of a wet and scalded cow and apply a strong pressure; then make some incisions, as that wound is moist and reduce it to its proper position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, it is at the joint that is between the arm and the chest.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The shoulder of the chest has sometimes been dislocated, and the reduction of that dislocation is difficult, but rather than causing harm to other joints, it is important to have speed in reducing it at the time of the dislocation, because the joint may become abscessed or something may happen in that abscess.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of that dislocation is that you place the shoulder joint of the patient on a table and the doctor extends the arm of that person, and the surgeon places his hand or his palm on the immediate vicinity of the joint, and pushes it back to its proper position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it should be considered whether the palm is already on the patient's abdomen, then place the patient's hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous, then the position of the patient's hand should be intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand is near the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if he returns soon, good; and if not, then immediately apply the ointment to the abscess and leave that; and do not repeat this, because otherwise, it will not be softened or cured before the days pass.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint may be twisted; and the patient does not know any cause, but the hand is softened and cannot bear any cause; then you should know that the nerves are crushed or torn, and then do not put it in the joint but apply a pointed cautery to the surface of the joint and firmly press on that.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And when the abscess has returned, then place it on the ointment that we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for several days; and then remove it and let it be left and the hand of that should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the patient's movement is obstructed and there is some gravity in it, then apply cold water and friction to some parts of the body until they are relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the cure of the aforementioned dislocations.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some parts are dislocated in these aforementioned cases.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of those parts is dislocated at the back of the hand or on the belly, then press the dislocated part and push it back to its place until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the dislocated part, suspend the weight of that part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is equal to the other side on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is not straight, apply the second method according to that description, and do not stop removing it on that day and exercising its movement, and apply the second method at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	If the patient's abdomen is also dislocated, and that part is attached to that part, then perform the first operation, which is to enter and heal it before it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly, do the same when other parts are also dislocated.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the dorsal vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the dorsal or neck vertebrae, and the remaining vertebrae of those places remain motionless, then there is no cure, as death approaches the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And in such cases, the patient's excretion is forced by his will, and he cannot retain it; and the other muscles or ribs or arms or legs of the patient, or one of those, or if one of the vertebrae of that place remains motionless, then the other muscles are softened and the removal of those is made in four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then it is already removed to the back parts and is called lumbar.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	If the patient's condition is such that you should consider whether the cause is impotence, because in that case neither cure nor healing of any kind is possible.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	However, in cases where it is seen through tapping or percussion or similar to those, as the ancients said about the methods of cure for such speech prolixity, which most returns to profit; however, I have already opened and enlarged from that one of which few people escape the excess of it, because of its proximity to understanding and explanation, which he has exposed and formed from various instruments of that kind, which will show you that and explain it to you.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that in impotence which occurs in the chest, there is neither cure nor healing of any kind; and similarly in that which is made on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, there is no cure except for that which occurs naturally in the back, which I will recommend to you.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be extended on his face on a flat surface as close to the wall as possible, and should be extended behind that instrument moistened with something so that the chest of the patient is not compressed.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then place a stick straight under them, leaning it against the ground at the end of the bed near their head, and another stick in front of their feet at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The first servant holds the stick, and should not be stationary in the pit; and another servant holds the other one according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap the patient's head with a cloth and leave the lion-tailed whip firmly in place; extend the end of the whip to the stick that should be under their head, and tie it there; and strengthen the other strap over their legs, under their legs, and support their chest; and then adjust all the straps and tie them to the other stick that should be under their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the servant should extend the strap to the part of the stick where it is placed, and should not leave the two sticks and the straps in their places as they were placed, but should not be stationary there as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his hands on the spine, strong enough to return, or places one hand on a table, and adjusts his feet on the table before returning.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if he does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three brasses, and lean it against the wall where we said the patient should be placed between the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the other end of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and stretches inward until the spine is enclosed and he returns to his place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the back of the table that is rotating around the middle; and you should stand on the ground with the patient's head in the rear of the two sticks, the length of which is about an arm, and the patient's head in the rear of the other two sticks; and the length between each stick should be a palm, and it has been done in each stick through which the back turns, and each should be firmly held on the ground so that it does not sag.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be a rod made of wood in which the bone is broken, and it should be rolled in the two spaces between the two rods.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it there is a space in which the rod is made, the length of which is one palm and is rolled like that; and in the other two rods, it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the bands that you have strung in the chest of the patient in the space where the head is, and the bands that you have strung in the thighs of the patient in the rod that is to be placed under his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then place one minister at each rod and have him twist the rod with his hand, as the surgeon has told us.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the rod:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the spine is returned and the wound is closed, then apply an adhesive bandage made of egg albumin, and stop; and place a flat plate on top of it, the width of which is three fingers or about those, and the length of it is the quantity that took up the wound, and on the part of the spine, it is.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then use the bandage we have mentioned, and feed the patient with subtle nourishment until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any inflammation in the area at the end of the healing process, then apply medicines that are moilific and line-clearing, and follow the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is administered in that place a plaster.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some vaginals occur in the back of the spine, and it is for that dislocation; and that bone which already exists for that reason should not be done to you at this time, because it will do great harm to you.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not only end in dislocation, but also occur at those joints which are removed and concave.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated at the back parts, or at the front parts, or at the inside parts, or at the outside parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mainly it is dislocated at the joints behind, and sometimes at the joints in front or at the joints behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And when you adjust the cushion of the healthy person to the sick person, it is longer and the knee is more bent than in the healthy one, and the sick person cannot straighten their leg, and this is the place where if they lie down, an abscess may form, so that the head of the cushion has already reached there.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And when this happens to the person who experiences dislocation, it is at the front joints, because those accidents of his are opposite to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And when this happens to the person who experiences dislocation at the front joints, it is by extending the other leg secondarily, but not bending that one which has the pain in the knee, and if it is perforated to go and cannot be carried there; and the urine of that person is retained and the swelling of that person forms an abscess, and you must carry that person on a stretcher.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And it is often the case that the person to whom such dislocation occurs at the back parts does not extend the elbow, nor can they bend the arm that bends the elbow, and the cushion under them is shorter than the other, and the elbow is softened, and the head of the cushion is placed at that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of these species of dislocation is that you consider, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already been cured by having it close to you, then administer reduction according to its arrangement, but not in that curative method; and therefore do not expect that in that there be any preliminary.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	If it is of the person in whom the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should apply that which turns the joint and extends it to the back parts and the front parts, and also to the right and left, whereby it returns strongly and does not require any other cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	However, if it does not return in this way, then you should expect that you prepare a strong and extend the cushion of the part farthest from the joint, or the hand of the patient, or the cloth that is laid over the cushion above the elbow; and another minister extends the hand of that above in such a way that places the hands behind the breasts of the patient; and then strongly hold the lion's skin on the edge of the cushion, and have another minister clean the end of the cloth.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if the extension is from the neck to the shoulder, or from the back to the waist.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if the extension is of all those in a row, when the patient is raised by his own head and hangs down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is particularly common in all four cases.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary for each special case to direct the appropriate treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the patient's own dislocation, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is at the parts below, place the patient supine on his back; and place your hand on the ribs in that place where the head of the ribs meets the loc which is left hanging down; and extend the ligament towards the angle to the most distant part of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another assistant should strongly grasp the patient's arms, and press the large part of the patient's back and extend towards the parts below by strong extension, so that it returns to its own place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this special method is the most effective cure for this member, which is reduced more than other methods.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	However, if it is excused from you and you do not obey the entrance of this healing method, then it is necessary to bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong, light rope, above their ankles and below their knees.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each should be equal to four times the quantity, and the patient's chest should be extended more than the other by twice the quantity.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient should be suspended over the top of the bed, and in the highest position; and the length of it from the ground should be equal to twice the quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then order a strong young man to traction the head of the cushion, and another young man should be suspended with the patient, and the other young man should pull the cushion with great force, so that the joint returns to its place at speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	However, in the proper reduction, when the dislocation occurs at the front part, then order the patient to lie on their back as soon as we have recommended in the having frozen; and strengthen the bandage over the chest of the patient properly and over their chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then place two boards under them, one under their feet and the other under their head; and then adjust the board under their chest, on which they will be wrapped in warm cloth, so that the patient is not suffocated by the board being between their thighs, so you must extend the parts behind them without pulling.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each assistant extends their part, and the doctor places their hand on the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you follow the reduction, it is generally good; and if not, pause carefully and as we have said in the previous case for that reduction.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Make sure that the patient does not turn over on their side too much.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the joints, then make sure that the board is extended more widely, and follow this method according to the patient; and the doctor places the palm of their hand on the affected joint, and the other hand covers it, and at that covering pause the one who is extending the parts behind them at the part of the elbow.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is at the back parts, it is not recommended that the patient be extended at the back parts and raised on the ground; having a pillow under their head, as if they were lying on a bed, if the shoulder of the patient is dislocated at the front parts, according to what we have said about the position of the patient on two pillows; and it is over their face and the limbs are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it should be administered compression with an ointment on the place where the joint is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is completed according to what has been said, and the splint of the reduction of the patient is not removed from you, and you extend two pillows from the patient, and when you see that those are equal and the patient extends their other pillow and expands that side, then you know that the member, according to what has been said, returns; and then you adjust two things and press and extend the band where the limb is not sore in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then remove the bandage and apply it again, and place one cushion under one side and the other under the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those joints in place, then you know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of softening, then return and apply that, and remove it again according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then remove that, and apply it again in a splint for several days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways, namely, it is dislocated forward, backward, and to the side; and it is not dislocated outward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to place his cushion on the side; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all the patient's limbs is done by placing the patient on their side, so that they can be supported; place your face close to theirs, and place their foot between your feet; and then make sure their hand is held firmly against the back of their neck, and another minister extends their leg inside so that it returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the support of their back is done by placing a cushion under them that does not labor.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then place that plaster on it and make the back adhere to the cushion, and then tie those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's bed for several days, until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of them to you is excused, then administer strong extension to the ligaments of which in the cure of the hand previous narrative.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter thirty-three.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the talus.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Sometimes the talus is dislocated by a small movement, and sometimes it is dislocated at an angle, and the dislocation of it is made either to the inside or to the outside.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that sometimes the talus inflates and protrudes from the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The cure of its dislocation is a difficult task, and it is that it should be extended by the ease of the hands and should be equalized within the time when it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	And in the cure of it when it is dislocated at an angle, one should make the patient lie on his back, and hold that one a strong and capable servant from the part behind his back in the middle position of it.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you should take your right hand and draw the foot of the most raised part, and your left hand from the part behind the foot in the position of the calf.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then approach the foot to your right hand, and approach the left hand with two fingers, and extend the left hand; and push the chest of the foot towards the right side of the bed.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make those two fingers as you have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the chest of the foot towards the third side of the bed, and you are at the back.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if you return in one or two ways using this method, and if you see the foot equal, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation until it returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing it by this method, then have the patient lie on their side on the ground, and place a pillow under their head, and place something between the cushions of the patient, and you have covered them with a cloth so that they do not descend.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the assistant of the patient holds their limbs, and another assistant extends the foot towards their hands or towards the band that lies on the back of the foot; and then each assistant should be extended against the extension of their part, and the pillow should be extended between the cushions of the patient so that the body of the patient is not pulled to the parts behind its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor then realigns the dislocation at its place, and another assistant holds the clean cloth to the parts behind, so that the dislocation returns to its ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and your health is declared after its reduction, then apply a strong bandage to it, and tie the foot to the bed.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful not to press the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over it is not too tight and does not harm it.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it like that for two or three days; if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And remove it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient to walk for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to walk in that space, do not do so until the dislocation has completely dissolved and healed, as that would not help with the cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if the abscess bursts, then be careful to administer in its cavity what we have described in our previous narrative, in another place for healing and soaking, until it is regenerated.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the treatment of the aforementioned dislocations of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	That which is dislocated should be stretched out as much as possible; and this is not difficult, if done in front of the patient.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in the ankle of the foot, then you should place the patient's foot on a level surface or on a table, and be there with them as if you were going to continue.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you should stand by the patient's foot, and place their foot on what is near the joints, and then step on that with your foot to bring it back into its original position, and so that you see that it is as good as new and does not appear in the prominent position.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place a table under the patient's foot that holds the entire foot, and has two covers, and then strengthen that with a structure that is decent and firm for three days; and then remove it and let it rest for several days, until it is restored and assured to be as good as new.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the specific types of dislocation that can occur due to pain or fracture or any other way.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occur, and you perform the cure and restoration of that, then certain complications may lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that reason, do not assume that the cure of that is known to you from long use, mercy and pity, but rather be patient, not hasty or presumptuous; and use in the beginning of medicines that cure tumors carefully, and leave the patient to divine judgment, unless to that one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, but rather for relief from the illness, and in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore, as soon as possible, try to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, giving that it engenders a tumor carefully.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And therefore, if the member returns after they want it, then administer a regimen that cures tumors carefully and heals the pain by means of drying substances that are suitable for it.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the bones that are separated, then you should perforate their skin, and do as we have said in the simple injuries of that kind in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid the second of that instrument in the ways of fear according to what has preceded my preaching; because that is better for you to do your own Creator, and more enduring to your glory, and more salutations to your own time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Here ends the words of Albucasis perfectly from which God may be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
