Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	And now begin the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh children, if you have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, because of its completion, and because of its explanations, and because of its declarations, I think that you will have completed this treatise, which is part of the operation of surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The operation of surgery was completely absent from our region and our time, until the science of it was greatly forgotten, and its existence was only preserved in a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which were mostly destroyed by those errors and hesitations until the understanding of it was closed and its power and art lengthened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I will live by this order of this treatise in the second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work, which is necessary for addition to the declaration, and for its preparation.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	In ancient times, the reason why a skilled surgeon was not always present in this time is because the art of medicine is long, and it requires practice in the science of anatomy, which Gualia discovered while knowing the joints and forms of members, and their conjunction and separation; and understanding of bones, nerves, and ligaments, their number, and their location; and of pulsating veins, quiet veins, and the locations of their excretion.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	As Hippocrates said, that a name is not important, but in the work itself, and more so in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have not yet mentioned that person in the introduction of this book; because those who do not know what we have said about anatomy, will not be able to avoid the error by which many men have died, as I have seen too many of them, because they are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	When a doctor was once folly enough to have incurred an abscess called hydrophobia in the neck of a woman, and had incised some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed into her body that she died between them.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And another doctor saw that the dragger had taken a stone from a man who had suffered from it in his state, and the stone was large, and brought it to him and passed it through the urethra, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And he had already called for someone to remove it, and saw that because of the size of the stone and the position of the patient he knew that she would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And another doctor who took the wound of a duke of our land for surgery, and was to a skilled blacksmith who was supposed to set the fracture in the joint of him; and because of his ignorance, he removed the fracture, above the wound, with pillows and splints with strong structure, and did not give the wound air.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then gradually remove the dressing according to his wishes, and then remove the bandage, and then remove the leech for several days and command that we remove the bandage; and this should be done while the wound and foot are still fresh, and it reaches perfection.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And then apply it to him, and arrange for the bandage to be removed, and thus achieve peace and alleviate his pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, if decay was already confirmed in the member, so that it could not be restrained from that, and did not cease to spread corruption in the member until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And then another doctor came who pierced an abscess with cancer, and it became ulcerated nearby in several days, until the great heat of it killed the patient.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason is that the cranium is clean of melancholic humor, so it does not cause it to reach the patient at all, but rather that it be in the member that suffers from all of it, and all of it should be held.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	For that reason, sons, it is necessary for you to divide the operation into two parts: one in which health is associated, and the other in which it is performed in the best possible positions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already experienced this in every place of this book where the operation is performed in which error and fear occur; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against that and lay aside the one who causes these things, so that the fools do not come to speak to you and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons with solicitude and protection of God, and your patients with success and closure.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God for the salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay aside the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and leave your weapons of that which makes you fear, so that your position in your faith and in your name does not escape you: because more remains to your glory, and more later in the world and after your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	In some cases, gout affects certain joints:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat the patient badly, because evil doctors may be recognized.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already dedicated this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The beginning of the division of the book, and first of the first section.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered from the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the handles of cautery, and about what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second section.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, about drying and puncturing, and about ventosas, and about plasters, and about the extraction of herbs and similar things, all chapter ordered from the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third section.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, about restoration and dislocation, and about the cure of torsion and similar things; chapter ordered from the foot, and from the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of pointed cautery and sharp medicine and memory of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that, the treatise begins with all freedom.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	That you know the quality of those tools and their cases, and in what condition it is prohibited to use cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the speech about the quality of the tool and its case is a long and elaborate, and subtle for knowledge, and secretly hidden; and from there, many people have spoken greatly, and they have been divided, and among them, a small part of their speeches is sufficient for me, because of length.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore, I say that cautery compares to all complete conditions universally, which is matter or its matter, except for two conditions, which are tail-like complete conditions.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the tail-like complete condition, matter is dry; therefore, some say that cautery is useful for that, and others say the opposite of that, which is that cautery is not convenient in illness that is due to quality and dryness, because nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that illness be dry and tail-like.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And tell that one who says the opposite of that one, that it is greatly beneficial for all kinds of tail diseases and dryness that are in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man with the moisture of him to the appearance of the fire, the body of a man becomes wet.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the word of that one, that he has experimented with this thing in some ways discovered.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	May it not be that that one who has already been proven and exercised in the chapter of cautery by previous practice, and has known the diversity of the appearance of men and the disposition of their diseases in their bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the span of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	May it not be that in other appearances, you do not fear, and more especially in moist diseases, because all the doctors have agreed on those, and they are not disagreed in the benefit of cauterization in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that the secret of healing by fire and its goodness is only in cauterization, because the fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member that is cauterized and does not harm the other member unless it is a small harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the action of medicine has brought them to that in the members which was previously absent, and it frequently brings it into the sick member with difficulty and often causes discomfort.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	However, the fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, but rather exceeds it. And we have known this through experience and the length of service in the study of the art over the truth of the causes; and for this reason you are excused from the length of the speech. And if it were not that it is not read aloud in this pause to you in secret, and the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels the sicknesses, the philosophical demonstration of the sermon, which would be sharpened in your troubles.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And you should know, sons, that they disregard the time in which it is convenient to make a cautery and pause at the best time of primeval.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cauteries are convenient at all times, because the harm caused by time is submerged in the benefit of it which is thrown on the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pain or necessary pain, quickly and forcefully, those that cannot bear delay because they fear the malice that comes from those who will enter, which is greater than small harm through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And do not catheterize in your feet, or, sons, that is only understood by the general people and foolish doctors, because that malady which is cured by cauterization does not require it all the time, and they stop that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not always present that they fear for that, because cauterization is not only in a place of medicine which alters the appearance and dries out the moisture which are the cause of pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But nevertheless, cauterization is used excessively over medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his malady returns in some time of the day, according to the appearance of the patient and the location of his malady, and its virtue, and that which is prepared in the body of the patient from the aggregation of the superfluities in him, and that which is acquired by him in his acquisition of foods and similar causes; but the malady in which cauterization is administered is a subtle malady in a member of few superfluities and moisture, such as a tooth cautery for pain and similar to that, it is possible that in it does not return that pain, but that which is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	More commonly, the pointed cautery is considered the last resort of medicine, and this language is correct, because I do not understand what they mean by that, as they believe that there is no cure that can be achieved through medicine or any other cause that would require cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The cause is opposite to that; and they understand that the pointed cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when administering methods of treatment in certain diseases, and those remedies do not work, and at the end of the cause, they administer the same cauterization, and it is effective for that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here they understand that the pointed cautery is the last resort of medicine, not as they understand it, which I understand from the common people and many of the foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that gold cauterization is better than iron cauterization, and they did not say that except for the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place for cauterization does not matter, since it is not absolutely true, because I already have some that are good and others that are bad, and cauterization with that is good and better than with iron, but rather when you make cauterization with fire of gold, it is not to your declaration, because it is ignited according to the amount that you want by the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive the cold; and if you adjust over the fire, the gold melts in the fire, and some sheets for that the craftsman can do for that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for that, a pointed cautery made of lighter and more conveniently placed iron is used to approach the direction of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on the cautery in the second chapters, and have ordered those between the feet, so that they can ask him what he wants for that.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cauteries for head pain caused by cold and dampness.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization gives relief from the dampness and cold that cause this accidental condition, which is caused by so many and various rheumatic fluxes, called corissas, from the head to the parts of the hands and feet, and many sleeplessness, and pain in the teeth and jaw, and generally from all evils that come from cold, such as paralysis, hardening, and apoplexy, and similarities in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: first command the patient to take a laxative medicine to cleanse his head, for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and his age and his custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command the one who is holding their head to shave it, and then do that shaving between your hands on a chair that is lowered and place your hands over their chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the razor from the palm of your hand on the nose between their nostrils.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when the place you mentioned is reached, mark that spot and then ignite the pointed cautery made of olive oil in this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that on the spot well and hold it steady, gradually increasing the pressure until it is strongly held, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand slightly and look at the spot, and if you see that some of the bone has been exposed, as much as the quantity of a grain of sand, then lift your hand, and if it does not return, put your hand back on that iron, or another of those, if it is cold, before it is seen from the bone what I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the spot and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your hand on the side that is burned and let that one be the one that destroys the scar of the fire.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the wound with the four-drug ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that as the plague is opened, so much more honey gets into it, so that it is better and more useful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say that the tail should be cauterized into the bone, and it should be held with the cautery until some part of the bone is stuck to it.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove that which is stuck to the bone, and then heal it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cautery should reach the back, until it enters the bone strongly enough to cause the bone to break, and this is the way to make small drills:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate that from that wound the fumes of the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then healed until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these two types of cauteries used in all people, but only in some men who are second in line for fear; and let that one, if possible, be better for health when it is done, because the head is revealed by the solution of continuity of which there is as we have testified in other members, and more so when the head of the patient is naturally free.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first type of cautery is more saving and better for me; and from that one, I advise you to do that work for health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the head cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When there is chronic and long pain in the whole head, and it continues in the patient for a long time, and it uses garlic, wormwood, capipurges, ointments, salt, leeches, guaiacum, and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that they have not been able to remove from it in any way, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not free and atrophic, but rather a great swelling, then use another cauterization after that one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And if it is necessary to cauterize that on the surface of his head, do so with a pointed cautery where the hair is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the hair and discover the bone in the amount that we have found and cauterize that with a pointed cautery on the part behind the head in the place where the wound is located, which is called the mastoid process, — and that is the place where the bandage is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And place your hand in the back of his head, and do not expose the bone, because the patient will feel great pain different from all other cautery pains on his head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say that this cautery in its place, where it is located, covers the part that is cauterized on the forehead and the back of the head is more subtle cauterization than that which is cauterized at the middle of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of ancient non-anterior cauterization.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the pain in the part of the head is sharp, or the pain extends into the wound, remove the medicines that make the head swell, and administer the other cure, which I have said in the chapters on diseases; and all is not improved, then cauterization is done in two ways: cauterization with an acute medical instrument, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May the pointed cautery be used as a medical tool to grasp a splinter and remove it by scraping it and then applying ointment to its ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then make an incision in the location of the pain on the temple with a sharp knife that is inserted into the wound and hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then apply pressure to the stopped area with constant constriction, and leave it for three hours; then remove the splinter, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then apply a poultice over the affected area that makes the wound bleed slightly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then heal it with that which cures it when it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do so with some medical tools that I have written about in the other treatise on medical tools.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cauterization be done in this manner: Ignite the cautery with this method:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a "claw-like" cautery, the head of which is shaped like a carnation in which there is some curvature, and at the middle of it is a slightly protruding point.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand on the location of the pain, and stretch your hand - to prevent the joint from being stuck - and move the small iron quickly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of the limb that is stuck due to the condition of the ligament is such that it covers the main part of the limb, and lift your hand to prevent the artery from being stuck - which is already there - so that no bleeding occurs.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a piece of cloth soaked in salted water on that location, and leave it there for three days; and then apply a warm compress around the border, and then care for it with an ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cauterize the end of the scalpel according to the cauteries, and be careful of the incision of the artery in this particular case.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cauterization of an ancient wound.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an ancient wound, as we have said in the previous cure and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if you do not improve the cure, and sometimes due to the disease that does not allow you to use the first cauteries with medicine or the cauteries with fire, then wait until the scalpel is completely albified, because it means that you should place your hand on the location of the pain along a line that is the longest part of the wound, or that part; and place your hand firmly inside the joint and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is often damaged during chewing, and that the jaw not be held shut and the nerves that are affected by it, and that it does not become spasmed.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and care of the flow of blood from the artery that is abscessed, where in the abscission of which there is fear, and especially for those who do not know what to do and are not studious or skilled; and leave the operation until the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find the memory of the regimen for the flow of blood from an accidental wound to the artery according to its own method, in its own place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this malady that does not allow this cautery and sees the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle loc of the head where we have reported, and cure the wound before it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you apply this cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter of stretching of the artery with a cauterizing needle having two points, and this is the best cauterization and more conformable.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cauterization of the pains of gout.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the big toe occurs due to cold and is treated with active causes and the other treatment mentioned in the division, and the pain does not disappear, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one without points, of which the following is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then apply the points to the fire, and bring it to the area around the big toe as if it were rotating, or in the circle of each one if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	And along with the cautery, apply it to the tip of the big toe little by little until you can reach the location well without hurting it.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of all points in the big toe, and it is necessary to do that, and then treat the locations until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of the cauterization of torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture that is cured and cannot be treated except by the special causes that come from flexion, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the specific part that causes dryness or spasm of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that part of torture that is called jerky and capripurgi and guarguarismes, and does not compare your treatment, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first one must be at the golden ratio, the second one a little below their temple, and the third one at the conjunction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your hand on the opposite side of the affected part, as softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The form of cauterization is that you cauterize that part with the cauteri in the right side of the golden ratio, a little above the corn on the head, and in the temple another, the longest one which should be second to the length of the said corn, and place your hand on the cauteri before it burns out the quantity of the majority of the specific part of the code.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cauteri, and it is a special one for the cutellari, the form of which is given below.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	May be, however, it is more subtle to have a few drops of that in the eye; and cover it with a cloth in case of excessive greasiness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then cure the area with that which is given for this process until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the ancient cauterization of apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and is treated with that which we have said and does not conflict with your medicine and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize that with four cautery: on all the horns of his head; and with the cautery and the middle of the head, as we have said; and with the cauterization in the crown.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cauterization is done as it is said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and then cure with that which processes.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of the cauterization of forgetfulness caused by flatulence.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Given that large and flatulent pills are customarily given to the patient at the beginning of treatment.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then remove the entire cap from the patient and place it on the affected area, as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And place some cautery needles there, which is the method of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Do this second method as described before.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if that does not work, then do three cauterizations on the back part of his head, which should be placed from the most superior part of the head into the most inferior part of the head.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place between each cauterization the entire thickness of the described cautery, and then care for the cauterized area as it proceeds.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you feel pain and the patient can bear it, then do the cauterization on the middle toe; and if you feel greater pain, then cauterize that one on the two toes.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And care for it until it is healed; and if the cauterization is made with olive oil, do it according to the form given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization of the perineum and softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	That you proceed in the melting of the head and that you have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that pointed cautery at the middle part of the head, and cauterize all the corners of the head, and cauterize on the back part of it, and three cauterizations on the spine of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the patient's illness of softening of the body, and the patient tolerates three of them, and the illness is strong, then cauterize that pointed cautery four times on the spine of the back, and afterwards cauterize inside where the sound of the throat comes from, and raise the left arm.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then care for that until it is healed, and this is cauterization oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is caused by flesh.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, at the beginning of the patient's illness, apply wet compresses to one side of their head and dry compresses to the other side, which we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and tolerant of exceptions to the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then give them soothing and cooling remedies, such as good food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that area with a pointed cautery at the middle of the forehead according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the back of their head, and over each hair of their head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that area with the pointed cautery as I have mentioned, having a paralytic and softening effect on their body over the spine of the neck and the spine of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use olive oil as prescribed.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then place a thin cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of the cautery for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and flabby, then cauterize those with the cautery that we have called in the previous chapter.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and tends towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him that which cleanses his brain according to the water that has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, and then make a torture device decently made from it on top of the circle, and then place that in the middle of his head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be tied down, and held down from all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then place a liniment; and it is more fitting for an ancient sheep's bladder.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And scald that over the fire to warm it up, which the one who suffered it says is sufficient when it is in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then put that in the middle of his head on the circle, and let it be mixed with him until it is dissolved.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this for the patient in every week a cure, or the other regimen until they are healed; or if you want, burn those parts with small points as much as possible, but always hold your hand on a cauterizing instrument: this is a special kind of cauterizing instrument that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And place your hand on that swollen part in between the buttocks or on grayish-white skin.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	About the cautery of descending water in the belly.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you declare the beginning of water in the belly by symptoms that I have mentioned in the division, then start and give the patient that which melts the head of him, and keep that from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let that sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command that patient to shake his head, and burn that part with the cauterizing instrument in the middle of the head; and then burn those two parts with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of water in two bellies, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one belly.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incite the pointed cautery across all veins and arteries that are located below the chin; and place those cauteries in that distant area on the side of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see any bleeding, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you should have knowledge of the skill that is in the extraction of arteries and the treatment of those and the prevention of blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some veins are cauterized in the neck below two bones and two cauteries previously produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of ancient tear ducts.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tear ducts of the eyes are ancient and manifestly present through the veins and arteries that are in the location of the forehead, and it is verified that such a thing is superfluous and flexible, then cauterize that one with the pointed cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water collection in the eyes, and place the cauterizing needle in the middle of the head and two cauteries in the neck below two temples, and two cauteries in the neck below two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is an urgent need for bleeding, then burn that part of the vein on the forehead with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the cauterization of bad breath.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that person who we mentioned in the division and have not yet completed your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient three nuts; and remove their head, and burn it with a medium-sized or large cautery iron.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then burn that part of the cautery iron on both temples, just below the hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that person.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the shape of the cautery iron.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cauterization of the eyelids to soften them.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then burn that eyelid with a cautery iron in the shape of the moon.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, with a small pointed cautery, make points on both temples, they will lengthen and become less painful.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each point should be according to the size of the temple.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand too hard against the cautery, but according to the amount that the eyelid is glued shut.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	About the cautery of the eyelid when the scales are converted into parts and the eye is pulled out.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the scales of the eye are converted into parts and the eye is pulled out, cautery should be applied in two ways: either by burning or by medical means that cause combustion.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If cautery is applied with fire, command the patient to close his eyes and open them again, while they are prolonged and equalized; and if you pull out the eye, then strengthen the eyelids of that eye with a bandage so that they do not become misshapen until the scales are born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore, when they are born and have grown up, pause the patient's head on your shoulder, and then place your hand over their eyelids, following the second figure of the crucifixion, and the beginning of the sign of the cross near their ears.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place a soft cloth in the patient's eye or in the mucous of the eyelid over their eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then remove the cautery that is in this form from them.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize the figure that you placed, little by little, in turns, until the surface of the skin is burned, which is like a piece of bread, appearing properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of healing from the work of the eye is that your hand has already raised the eyelid and the ears of the patient are elevated for the pricking of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave them for three days, and then place it over the eye until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that wound until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if it returns through the eyelids due to some cause and the eyelid becomes softened, then do another cauterization on that same area as you had done previously.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the eyelids are already in the eyelid and it is lowered to its natural position and equalized, and the eyelids do not press on the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cauterization of this medicine is not as you command the patient to lift the eyelids and equalize them, and then make a fold of cloth in the shape of a bandage of mercury.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take some sawdust and freshly ground charcoal, mix them well with the other ingredients, and make a paste of it so that it is not crumbled; and then spread this paste on the cloth that was made in the shape of a bandage of mercury, and place it over one eye; and place the other eye in a bowl of egg white, and the head of the patient should be elevated.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the medicine on your hand and press it gently onto the patient's skin without causing pain, as if you were applying a hot iron.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And if the patient's skin is still painful after applying the medicine, then remove the medicine and your hand from the affected area; afterwards, wash the affected area with clean water; and afterwards, consider whether the skin has been lifted as it would be by a cut or burn, as it is now; and if not, return to applying the medicine to the area where it did not cause pain and was not damaged before washing.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards, place your hand over the affected area until the tumor of the abscess is completely eliminated, and then cure it with a poultice or another remedy until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to keep constant vigilance in your treatment that no medicine falls out of the wound, and if the skin around it becomes soft and some cause of the hairs in the wound, then repeat your medicine on the area where the skin has become soft, and as you did at the beginning, and do so until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the method of extracting urine.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	You should know that the thighs of men are varied according to their size and proportionality, therefore your contraction is made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	Do not obstruct the correct path to the person who is being studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the thigh.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with this method that we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and do not confuse your treatment, then command the patient to lie on their back with their head slightly elevated, and hold their head at some distance from your body in such a way that it is neither too close nor too far away.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a poultice of bread or mustard on the affected thigh.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then use the cautery of this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be hollow, such as a cane or pen knife, from one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you see, it should enter into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to come out with a probe.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But it is better to use a thin one for that work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And if the fistula is opened, place your finger inside and drain the pus from it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then open it and remove the puss from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And place your hand over the hot cautery that is burning, and with another hand hold the patient's nose, so that your hand or the patient is not disturbed, and then remove the cautery from the patient's nose and clean it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of the treatment, the cautery goes inside the bone, it is well; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and let that be there for three days, and place your hand over that area to keep the wound dry until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If the wound has been open for several days and has not healed, then pause over it with an acute, corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and then scrape it according to what is appropriate in its capital.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula that was first described as follows: place the cautery in the location of the fistula and make a small incision in it; then apply your hand to the area, holding it well to prevent the plug from entering the wound; and ensure that you apply the cautery on the outside of the wound so that the plug does not reach the bottom of the wound; and cover the area with albumin or water, which will adhere to the loc of the fistula and heal it by miraculous means.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed by the method we have described for the cauterization and cure, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a tracheal tube and reduce the fistula to the patient's own body when it returns to its proper location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cautery of the wound in the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Muggy weather often causes tears in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those tears with the same cautery that we have mentioned in the divisions and do not extend your treatment, then ignite the small pointed cautery of this form:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And place it according to the thinness of a spoon.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place your finger carefully in those tears until the cautery reaches the edge of the tears.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the uvula or on the palate or on the teeth, an abscess occurs and a breach is made, and it is broken, and it is old, and blood comes out and a fistula is formed, and then you treat that and do not extend your treatment, then cover that you ignite cautery according to the amount that has been recovered in the fistula, and place that ignited in the throat of the fistula, and then place your hand inside until the hot iron reaches the edge of it, and on the other side make a wound or two; and then treat it with the same ointment that we have mentioned for treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the sin is removed and healed, then it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and treat the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cautery of teeth and the softening of jaws.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the jaws are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you treat those with medicines and do not confuse, then place the patient's head on your knee, and hold the cautery in the shape that will come to hand, and when you have placed the tube on the tooth and inserted it into that cautery burning fiercely, and hold it for a moment until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth has reached.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then raise your hand, and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient closes their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and you can see that when the decayed tooth is closed and the softened jaw is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of the cauterization of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or if there is frost or worms in it, and the usual medicine does not cure it, then cautery is done in two ways: either with the border of a cow's horn, or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with the border of a cow's horn is to take the border of a cow's horn and heat it in a fire, then grasp a cloth and wrap it over the tip of the tent, and quickly immerse that border, and place it on the painful tooth, moving it around until it is heated.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the border above that, and place it on the painful tooth, and place another on the fire, until the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	May the cauterization with fire be done when you wait for the tube of iron or coal, and if there is any impurity in it, the heat of the fire should not reach the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cauterizer in the shape that will come, and place that on the tooth, and your hand inside while the cauterizer is being heated; and do some maneuvers so that the pain remains or on that day or on the other day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And cover that with the pressure of that cauterizer that the patient opens his own mouth with good border, and hold that for an hour and then remove it; and this is the shape of the cauterizer.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize where you want to extend according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cauterization of protrusions.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When protrusions are due to swelling and humors that are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you want to dissolve them slightly, then ignite the cauterizer with the shape of which is this following, having two extremities so that the smoke from the cauterizer can escape through the other extremity, and place that on the abscess one maneuver, and if necessary for that, until it reaches the top of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, then apply heat to it according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days, and then place it over the affected area, poured with boiling water until it has been burned by the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that wound and apply bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the needle or pointed cautery is as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of the application of a pointed cautery to warts and its removal.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes over the lower part of the lung, especially when it is accompanied by coldness, then make sure that the patient is evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then apply a pointed cautery to the center of the groin in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to apply the pointed cautery to the groin or burn the skin of the patient, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And apply a pointed cautery to the joint of the neck at the lower vertebra of the back.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the pointed cautery of the patient should be used in the same way as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then care for that person with that remedy before they are healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cautery for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When a cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, the patient does not have fever or tachycardia, and it is an old disease, then apply two cautery needles on the sternal angle of the chest; and another cautery needle in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and use the pointed cautery as before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, your cautery should be made with the pointed needle called "puncta", whose form is described in the punctation of arthritis.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And their points should be inserted into those; and then care for that person with that remedy before they are healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cautery should have three points because the cautery is made in this way:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cauterization of the nipples, which is a helpful remedy.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the dislocation of the helpful remedy is caused by excessive humidity and is not stopped at its return time, it must be returned before it returns to that usual state, and with a slight movement, it can be moved as we have testified, so that first you reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient over on his back or on his side; and raise the chin, which is in the part of the nipple to the parts above the said of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the part of the nipple.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery, which has two points; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the chin until it penetrates between the two sides; and the figure of the cauterization will be as follows:
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And that subtle second according to the amount of heat; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some cautery needles are adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cautery needles.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place your hand over the cautery points with salt, and make the patient comfortable without causing any pain for a while until they are comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and below, then make that incision, and then cauterize over the muscle with a clavil or pointed cautery needle, where the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is cold and moisture in the stomach that multiplies inside it and causes pain, and if you continue with the treatment methods without confirming, then the patient will be on their back, and extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize with three cautery needles: one needle is placed at the chest for the length of a finger's width, and two needles are placed on the sides of the cauteri, forming a triangular figure; and stretch those that are not adjusted to prevent them from being pierced.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery matches the thickness of the two tires of the horse's cart.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if the shape of the cautery is according to this form, then if you wish, use a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery in the form of a circle according to this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach is to be cauterized at the point where this cautery frightens him: and it is that you should put your hand on the stomach puncture according to the amount you wish to apply, and then cauterize those points with this cautery; and then care for those parts with the healing remedy before they are healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cauterization of the foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain arises in the foot due to coldness or moisture or heavy wind before its normal composition is disturbed by excessive discharge, and the patient is cured with the remedy we have mentioned and not otherwise, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back, and then apply three cauteries according to this form and this amount on the foot below the ribs, which is the position of a man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the greatest length of the said cautery, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straightened.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not understand the movement of the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of that which is adhered to the quantity of the main part of the codex is not adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet, then extend your arms, which have already been extended, and raise your shoulders.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cautery with a surgical knife, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overprocess in the cauterization, and let the main part of the codex be adhered so that the whole body is adhered and reaches into the intestines, where the codex is thin; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of perforation of abscess in the thigh with a pointed cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When the inflammation or abscess in the thigh is severe and you want to know if that abscess is in the muscle of the thigh or in its tunic, then if it is in the muscle of the thigh, the patient's weight and pain are increased.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the thigh, then the pain is greatly increased and often exhausts the doctors with its treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be placed on his side; and then feel the location of the abscess and try to puncture it; and then ignite the cautery that is shaped like a needle, the shape of which was described in the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And then cauterize it with that and continue to puncture it until the entire chain is completely burned, until it reaches the bone, until it exits safely.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that as for the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not recommended to use this form of cauterization except for the one that has been studied in the art of medicine and has known many illnesses; however, this one has experimented with some methods on this operation, but rather leave it to those who know better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cautery for foot pain.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauteries of the needles of astrology for foot pain should be made in this way, and this is the one you should take from the needles of astrology, a long dry needle that is found, and it should be of the thickest of the same.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge that one in oil and place the other one in the fire, and then cauterize with a cauterizer in that place which is between the continuity of the scapula and the collar; and two small cauterizers on either side, one slightly declining to the part where the beard was left, and two cauterizers in that place which are declining between the fifth rib and the cizena, declining slightly to the parts behind; and another cauterizer in the middle of the chest; and three cauterizers on the back; and one cauterizer in that place which is between the two shoulder blades, and two cauterizers on the sides of the chest, after the cauterizer which is between the two shoulder blades.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not grasp your hand with the pointed cautery, but rather in the manifest part of the wound in work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they say that ancient physicians used pointed cautery similar to a needle and ignited it, then placed it in the place between the ribs, until it reaches the swelling and the pus is removed, as we have said about the abscess of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this puncture, the pointed cautery does not cause fear, because it has often happened in the place of the fistula that did not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the gums.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating the gum disease, you should not compare your treatment to what has been said about division, but rather cauterize in the same way, in three main ways, all of which are correct. One way is to make three or four cautery strokes along the length of the gum according to the shape of the cautery of the foot, the shape of which has been described before.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a bit more, and the handle of the cautery should be the handle that we have said in the cautery of the foot equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not place your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be on their side.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery with two matches, which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the codex that is at the end of the meal, which prevents the patient from turning over on their left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be the one that lifts the codex according to the length of the body, so that the cautery is made at the same latitude as the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two matches, light one, in the moment when those penetrate the codex from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus four cautery are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with the cautery that has three matches.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you should cure the pointed cautery so that it does not cause pain for too many days, as it is more harmful than other previous causes in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries should not be used in dropsy, but rather on the appropriate spot.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you are treating dropsy, follow the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division, and do not compare your treatment, but rather place four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, another on the chest, and another on the belly, and two cauteries between the spine of the back, and one on the right side of the chest, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cauterization in place so that it does not cause pain for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not expel the patient from treatment too soon with that pointed cautery which is used to help them recover, and let them rest in order to aid their healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the pointed cautery that is used to cauterize the belly should be like a hook according to the form mentioned above, and the one that is used to cauterize the arms should be like an olive branch according to its form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cauterization of the feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are inflamed with hydrops and filled with water sitrina, then cauterize the feet over the back of the foot in the area between the ear and the ring, and raise your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then raise your hand again, and do not return to that spot, because the water sitrina will ooze out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	And the cautery should be made in this form: And then make two cautery points on each thigh, and in each thigh make a cautery point at the end of the cautery blade.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be as long as the cushion: and place one end under the patient's neck and the other at the lower part of the cushion; and over each cushion, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time to allow any remaining liquid from it to drain out.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then care for those causes that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of cautery of wounds in the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When wounds in the abdomen are caused by cold and humidity that penetrate deeply into the body, this is the digestive and retentive power, which is in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured by these methods of treatment and not by medication, and sometimes the patient suffers from a powerful cautery of virtue exhibiting, then cauterize that with a large cautery on their stomach according to what was previously mentioned in the cautery of the stomach, with the cauteri of the circle and with four cauteries in the circumference of the abdomen, with the clavilh subtil; and with the cauteri over the liver over aloes large, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you see the abundant humidity and the patient is tolerating it, then cauterize that above the perineum and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cautery devices above the stomach and near the groins, which will greatly improve the condition that you should not err in.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34:
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient varicose veins.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are varicose veins in nature or one of thick humors that have infiltrated or corrupted moisture, and they are cured by the method we mentioned in the division and do not compare it to another cure, then cauterize with three cautery devices above the small of the back, and with a cauterizer below the belly through two such.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that the stomach of the patient is ulcerated and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is swollen, then cauterize that above the stomach with a large cautery device as previously mentioned; and with one cauterizer on the throat, and with another cauterizer on the lips of the patient with a clavilh, and leave the cauterizer for some time, and then cure the patient before they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter thirty-five.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cauterization of the arteries near their opening.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you incise an artery, then you apply the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that lit cautery into the incised artery, and finally introduce it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do that one or two times, if they are too thin, then cauterize each of them as soon as you have recovered, and then care for those that you apply to the wound until it is healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery over something, it is more harmful.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter thirty-six.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of cauterization of fistulas that are formed in nature between their parts.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When a vein is naturally blocked in the back, and it becomes old, it causes insanity and corrupted humidity, and that which is put in front of it to pierce it subtly, and then know the amount of its depth from the front part.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then apply the cautery that resembles a needle.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that lit cautery into this fistula, and according to the amount in which the tent enters it.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat with that cautery entering it, so that those corrupted humors are burned away quickly once or twice or three times, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or the intestine, then guard against all those places; and do not do that unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place where it was healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the wound is sealed, and the matter has been removed from it for a long time, then you will know that it has been completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the matter is not removed from it and remains there for a long time, then you will know that it has penetrated into the bone or rotted the bone, or that it is due to one of those causes from which it will return in memory to its location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cauterization of the teeth.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain occurs in the teeth due to a blow or heavy grinding, and the patient's mouth is closed, then you should cautiously cauterize that tooth with a pointed cautery on each tooth, using a clavilh of which you remember the remembrance.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And if you cauterize it too strongly, then do so after a short time, so that three lines of cauterization will come, and they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes weakened and softened due to injury and moisture, and the patient is unable to hold their urine, then cauterize that part of the bladder which is closest to the urethra, using a heated iron, and cauterize another part diagonally opposite, and another on the other side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cauterization should be according to the thickness of the skin; and cauterize that part which is closest to the back, or use two cauterizations if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And use a heated iron according to the procedure.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cauterization of the mouth.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is injury and moisture in the mouth, and it is prohibited to use compression, and the teeth are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs due to their presence, then it is necessary to cauterize that part with three cauterizations around the navel, as we have mentioned in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cauterization on the closest part to the back, or with two cauterizations, and use a heated iron.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cautery of the dislocation of the shoulder.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture enters the shoulder joint and causes pain in its location, and it is not possible to compare it with the other when they are together.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is at the top where the arm bends.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then cut the patient on the part of the shoulder with a similar pointed cautery, so that you have enough to feel around the circumference of the joint as it is rotated, and so that the joint falls into the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the pointed cautery that preceded the shape in the cautery of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this pointed cautery is not at your disposal, then use three pointed cauteries or a large olive one.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the pointed cautery according to the thickness of the entire sinew; and cure that which is not healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the buttocks, and its cause is from the vein being wet and humid, the patient is cured by what we have said, and you should not compare it to anything else, and this remedy is ancient, so that you should let the patient sweat out heavy humors through foul or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cauterization in this case is one of two: either with a cauterizing iron or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The second method is one of two known methods, of which the first is to cauterize it above the buttock of the patient with three triangular cauterizing irons in this form, and do so well with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And if the space between each cauterizing iron is equal to the thickness of the said pill, and if the cauterizing iron is olive oil or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes several wounds should be made on the back of the buttock so that there are four cauterizing irons.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize the circle that precedes the form in the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, so that the circle contains and burns all the tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterization in joints when pain adheres to the shoulder and does not extend into the space.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it extends into the space, then cauterize those two cauteries on the space over the area where you wrap the patient that has the pain; and one cauterie on the chest for four days called the left side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cauterie cuts through, and the depth of the cauterie is according to the quantity of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient wraps that the pain extends into the area mentioned for the feet, then cauterize those here where you wrap with a cauterie for three points or four or more if necessary from that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient wraps pain to be left behind the knee in the space, then cauterize those here with a cauterie cut through.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterization that does not burn the skin too much like fire or great scarring, and that for that reason it is harmful to the patient or causes contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen another of those who cauterize on the scalp and burn in the cauterization, and the bed on fire inflated before the tumor is achieved, and fire perforates and corrupts the whole foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then a strong solution of stomach, and then that death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones in the cauterization of any cauterizing instrument of which this is the method: make a circle of iron from which the circumference is the length of one palm; and it should be its orifice according to the thickness of a date or a few.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let that circle be another third; and let the space between them be the thickness of a thumb; and let those circles be placed in two parts; and let the length of those be one or two thumbs, and make in those iron edges well covered in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Approach the fire until it warms and produces sparks, and place it on the affected area, the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that spot with three cautery points in a row.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; apply ointment to that spot and keep the wound open for several days; and then heal that spot with medicine until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	However, my sons, we have not used this type of cautery for this purpose because of the fear of its effects on it, and because we have found some that are harmful to it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But from the barks of trees, apply those that are harmful to it, and find that spot on it.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But from the barks of trees, apply those that are adhesive medicines that you make two circles with a needle perforated in which the tongue of the iron door is inserted; the length of the needle should be two nuts or those that are like them.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	If the space between the patient's legs is equal to the width of the bed, and it is covered from below and above, and contains something in between according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place your hand on the part of the water where the patient is lying, and cover the area with your hand; take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that water should be gradually increasing in heat, and you should do this for the duration of one hour, and suffer the patient from the burning and adhesion of it — that is why this burning has such a strong effect — until the burning stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand with the instrument and remove all the hot water from the patient's body, and wash it with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And leave it for three days and place your hand on that border until the blackness of the adhesion remains, and then wash it again after several days, and apply poultice to it; this is a good remedy.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the cushion or leg, place it in the position that contains water second to what is made in the tank equally.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of water bath, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and of caustic not extinguished from the remaining part of one, and triturate it in a new bath of which the remaining part should be perforated by a small trough according to the amount that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of the other bath in another boiling water, and pour over that alkali and living caustic of two parts of which those take by a certain amount, and put those on the tieua ma for good compression, and leave the bath that remains from the quick water in the remaining part to the boiling water.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And adjust all of that water, and pour it over another living caustic and other renewed alkali, which is of strong acidity, the one that is used in other medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, because the operation is of fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some medicines are known to be cauterized widely, such as thyme and myrrh, causing pain that is not necessarily known.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Guillia reported about an old man who had undergone the operation and cure for which he was healed of pain in all limbs and sciatica, and praised it as being of great benefit, and said that no other cure was necessary, and that it was cured by a certain method such as recommendation, which he knew well about that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be placed near the affected part, and if it is not fresh, take a recent fig; and it should be trampled by a few gray men and placed on the painful part, whether in the water, or in the cushion, or in the chest, and left.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for as long as the patient feels the effect of the sweating.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place that in the water, and when the body of him is soaked, put it into the ground, where the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	You should know that no one uses this cautery for these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	However, it is said that when a goat wound occurs, the vein should be cauterized with this method: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the foot of the patient and the floor.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat dung and apply it to the wound with fire until it is burned; and place it on the wool and leave it until it is stretched out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this, and do not stop doing it until the sensation of pain reaches the end and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cauterization is called the cautery of cattle.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	About the cauterization of pain in two places.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain occurs in the two places due to various causes, such as impact or puncture or excessive evacuation, and due to similar causes, by infusion of wet and ground material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauteries do not cut except in this specific case where it is made for the discharge of broken matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Then, to evacuate the patient's body, use flat, similar pills, which are made in two rows where the pain is located, three lines apart, and then try to insert one or more cauteries, according to the patient's tolerance and the effectiveness of the pills.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And make sure to use a pointed cautery for cauterization.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, use three or four cautery needles in this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of cauterization at the beginning of gout.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This disease often affects small children; and similarly at the beginning of this disease in children, it occurs on their structure in the joints, causing elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And later in the lower spine of the back and in the knees, where it begins to overcome the other spinals.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore when you see that and want to prevent it, then use this pointed cautery that is circular in the following form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	which grips the cautery over all part of the sacrum equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the sacrum with two or three lines of the pointed cautery.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And place the points between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And care for the area where you have said that it is healed.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that the cautery is not applied in a state of paralysis that is caused by nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore when gout is cured by the method of treatment and the pain does not return, then use the cautery again.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And if it is necessary to cauterize that area near the joint of the foot, use a pointed cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the shape of this cautery is as follows:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain spreads to the other joints or is not relieved, then cauterize each ankle with three or four points from this pointed cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need more cauterization than these points provide, then cauterize that area and do not press your hand too hard against the cautery before, only around the shape of the wound.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain spreads to both ankles, then administer the cautery that we mentioned in its previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the calves and is called sciatica, then prick around the circumference of the tendons as they revolve, prick in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the mentioned places, then prick around the base of each nail and on the palm of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain spreads to other joints or muscles, then cauterize all parts of the help.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient without proper care and reception of medicines, as if proper care is given and flatulence is evacuated, this cautery may heal, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of the cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the fracture is in the lower extremities and the intestines are pushed against the abdomen, and if this begins to happen, then let the patient lie on their back and use gentle cautery to prevent the wound from opening from their belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then place the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to hold their breath until the hole is made or the intestine or hernia appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that hand to the patient's thighs, and try to feel the rupture on the bone of the femur, at the end of which should be similar to the shape of a circle above the lower parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then remove the cautery that has this shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	enter through which there is a hole and remove the needles.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on that part of your hand that is correct, and enter through that hole where you can reach the bone of the femur from the inside; and repeat that other way if you have not succeeded in the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe the position of the intestine during your cautery, so as not to burn that intestine because it does not come out over the patient and cause great harm or death.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you have the pointed cautery, do not press the bone, do not ruin your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And note that the cautery for children should be thin according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then take care of the location of the cautery for three days until the wound is healed from the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of those other wounds until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for fourteen days until the wound is closed and healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And note that the patient's nourishment should be given according to the length of time of their treatment, and that the intestine should not come out due to the effort to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And after fourteen days, give them soft food appropriately made, and keep them on it for another fourteen days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And if they are tired from labor and food intake and drinking, and from violent vomiting, because when they follow this regimen of healing, the whole person is cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And if you want to cure the ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, and do not want them to reopen, then cauterize the rupture with a red-hot iron according to its size, and remove that which is exuded from the wound as if it were a clean part of it; and cure that which we have said, and do not adjust it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And it has been said that the first ruptures should be cauterized with a triangular iron according to this form, rather than with a tent.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is placed that is higher than the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a claw iron, but the first iron is thinner and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cauterization for torture.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When the joints are affected by gout or after an injury, and the pain persists for a long time and does not respond to medical treatment, then it is customarily called chronic gout by doctors.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery for each member should be of appropriate size and temperature, and its effectiveness and duration, and the location of the pain and the torsion of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cauterization, good; otherwise, repeat the cauterization on it, because according to the custom of those pains, they are points of the member that approach the one that is affected, so that you can obtain those cautery within that patient before he is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	About the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leprous ulcers are cauterized with a great deal of care, and if the type of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of flax and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, when you want to cauterize that one, consider whether the leprosy has come and if it is the same as we have mentioned in the division and do not delay, and be careful on the patient that corruption may comprehend all of his body and all of his appearance, then cauterize that one on the head: with one at the back of the head, and with the second one behind it, turning the face to the end of the hair; and with others on two ears; and with one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, your hand should hold the cautery a short distance from the bone, and then move the scales away from it, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from there; and cauterize on the melon according to what is prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then you should cauterize those parts with the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter; and with a pointed cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cautery needles on both ears, and two cautery needles on two spinal bones of the neck, and two cautery needles on the spinal bones of the back, and one large cautery near the collarbone, and one on the shoulder, and two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on the hips, and one on each hip, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the patient's hands; and cauterize all these joints of the mentioned limbs and feet, and on each toe of his feet, and on the fossils of his limbs.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that are above the ankle, do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some wounds are cauterized with a cautery on the bones of the jaw and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the throat.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and more certain it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, just like those who are asleep, because their body is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And remember that the cautery should be large or small according to the members and joints according to what is preceded by the tools of the species.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply care to the cautery with flour mixed with honey and the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of cauterization of stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you should cauterize that numb member with a cautery according to the size of the member or its location.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And insert the pointed cautery into the neck's hollow a little bit.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then take care that the poultice inside is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes the veins are cauterized, which causes pain in the arms and feet, and in the spine of the back and the flexion of the nerves that move that member, and the pain remains.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume about that, but rather what is known in the anatomy of the member and the exit of all the nerves moving the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of cauterization of warts that are malignant.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When warts are ancient and do not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then cauterize with a pointed cautery inside that little bit according to the quantity of the species in the neck, until the whiteness and color of it remain and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And take care that the poultice of barley and lentils with olive oil and leaves of myrtle, and salt of columbine or salt of iris, each part is a separate piece and all are mixed, and then let it be a cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the cauterization of the knee.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When a tumor begins to form and you want to remove it, then cauterize that circular cautery around it as it is turned.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And they say that it should be cauterized with the back cautery in the middle place; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it may become an ulcer, and I have already seen such cases.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is better to be cauterized around it as we have said with a circle, or with a pointed cautery.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 10.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cauterization of the abdomen.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some abdominals are late in maturation, and they are due to excess, or due to the patient's old age, or lack of strength, or time, and you want to hasten the maturation of abdominals; then cauterize around it with a small pointed cautery, and place a poultice on that which will hasten its maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to puncture it with the pointed cautery, then you should hold the cautery in this form: and pause it at the middle location of the abdomen before it penetrates the intestine.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is left in that location where it was placed, so that the arm of the patient is relieved; and then care should be taken to ensure it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of cauterization with a corroding agent.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A corroding agent is a corrupting substance that moves within the body, which corrodes what it comes into contact with like fire eats dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see that corroding agent in the location where the cautery was made with fire, then you should hold cautery needles of various sizes, and large ones as needed in the location where the corrosion is occurring.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then you should cauterize it from all parts until you remove all the corrosion and leave no cause of it remaining.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let it rest for three days, and apply a mixture of oil on the cauterized areas until all the scars have been completely removed and all the corruption has been eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then carefully remove those flesh-like growths that are forming.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if three days have passed and the flesh has not healed in that area without corruption, then repeat the cautery on that spot where the corruption is present.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And apply some acute medicine in the form of ointment, which is halfway between the cautery and the ointment.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, if the cautery is too harsh and causes more harm than good, then use a milder method.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you have already mentioned the treatment of that area with acute medicine in the division, and now take the one that will be needed there.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cautery for boils and other similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Boils are often found in the parts of the foot behind the patient's illness, which is called a boil, and this causes great pain, entering the foot; and cautery is applied to those areas in two ways, either by burning or by applying a hot cauda.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	May the pointed cautery be ignited like a torch, similar to a pen of wax, which should be made of iron according to the quantity it contains for all parts, and also of fine marges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place that lit cautery over the key, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the key until the cautery reaches the depth of the key.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it for three days until it begins to burn.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply that with wild marjoram crushed with salt, and leave the plaster on for one hour, until that creature is eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then care for the area with generated meat until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and if there are sudden accidents on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you should apply those cautery with water, and take a syringe of iron or of wax or of a pen of wax, and place that over the key; and then pour a little water into the syringe, and place your hand, and rotate that with compression of your hand from all sides, and press the margin of the syringe on the root of the key, and find the water flowing to the tip of the key; and wait for the patient for a short while until the bite of the water flows for an hour, and then remove that, because the key has its roots eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And they did this, and then brought the other into the room where all of them were in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then they cured those who had red spots on their necks by applying this to the gums, which the flesh absorbs.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When someone has trembling due to a disturbance in the nerves or from fever of a similar cause, it is customary to apply four cautery points or one large cautery on the spinal vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra, and also on the chest, and on the stomach, apply olive oil.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of the patient ceases and the healing of the illness is accelerated.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cautery for accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are sharp accidents, and wounds that are made of thick, corrupted matter; then at the beginning, as it appears, that it should be cauterized over all the head of the fistula with a thin cautery, the end of which is extended to the fire; or on the long neck of the erection; or with a round cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes the intestines are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and they do not believe it, but those who do this break the excess and heal from that.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, one should perform this before the evacuation with a catheter.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 66.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cauterization of fluxes of blood due to injury by cutting of the spine.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Too many wounds that cause blood flow due to cutting of the spine, which leads to deformed scars, or from the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the member, and similarly, and it is difficult to remain like that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, if this happens to anyone, you should immediately place your hand on the opening of the spine, and press over that one which you said is already open those wounds inside so that the blood flow of the spine does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then press on the wounds with many small and large olive leaves, and blow over them until they are almost healed.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then approach the second location where the pain is, on which the artery is broken, above the vein, quickly and as soon as possible before it bleeds again, and insert the cauterizer into that wound and restrict it.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the wound is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove the first cautery and extend it, then take another cautery regularly from the cauterizers that are in the fire, and do not stop doing that until the wound is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and let another evil come over the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the wound in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, there are four ways: either cauterize where the bleeding is coming from, or extract it when it is not being extracted, because when the extremities of the veins are burned and the wound is restricted, it is held with a cloth or bandage for strong structure, or they are placed on medicines that have the virtue of restricting the wound; and they are strengthened by a cushion or compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May the one who administers a proper restriction of the patient's arm and stricture of the cloth or by position of causes that are burning and similar, does not compare but rather tarts.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If this happens to anyone and is not the doctor present or medicine, then open a pause of the indicated one on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand that it enters into the great contraction of the patient until the sane is not separated from the superior part of the plague, and over the arkeria it should not remain; and over the arkeria it should be sprinkled with water of a great coldness until it is congealed and swollen; and more cover in which there is a need for cauterization or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and incisions and of bleeding and of wounds and of their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that all illness in which cauterization by fire or medicine is convenient, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments in which it is necessary to have the forms of the cauteries; and we have ordered the chapters of the subordination of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	I will process in this chapter for that kind of case, so that the one who wants it is helped, about which he will ask.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And since I will begin that, child, you should know that in this chapter it is for fear of that which is in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And since you should be very careful about that, because in the operation which is in this chapter there are many evacuations that are very dangerous, such as aspiration of the vein or incision on the abscess or extraction of exsudation or purification of the plague or extraction of a stone or incision of a petra and similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the most of them death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that that does not happen to you in which there is danger, because some evils are caused by human mistakes.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of them you will go to your disease and it is caused by death, and because of the violence of that which you find of your disease, and because of the length of the disease of him, and because of the disease there is fear of that which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those who give you this advice, you should listen to them and hope for your healing, as their illness is dangerous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not believe in anyone who comes to you in this way; and your caution should be greater than necessary, and your haste; and do not presume any cause about this unless you have certain knowledge that it is good for you, and to which a successful sequence brings praise.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your diseases of prophecy and indication to which you are converted, because in that one there is help for you above acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God inspires in you His understanding and does not lead you astray and protect you, because that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters following the second chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head between the feet, so that it is good for you to ask about that and of which you have a need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	About the cure of gout that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this disease is caused by children from childhood and when the moon starts the head of the child is sick.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some are caused by an unknown cause.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this disease except in children; and all those whom I have seen are accompanied by death, and because of this it is my opinion that the work is left undone in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head whose head was full of gout, and the head of which was always swollen until it could not be touched because of its great size, and more than the moisture increased until it died from fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is added between the sinews and bones, or it is added behind the bones on the skin.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation in that case where the moisture is between the sinews and bones and the abscess is small, you should cut in the middle of the forehead with a slit in the latitude, and the length of the slit should be two nights until the moisture runs out, and this is the shape of the sponge:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	If the humidity is increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is on the bone, then you should open the commissures of the skull in all parts and let the water out when you understand that your hand is on the back and not to the sides.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	So that you cut in the middle part of the skull with three incisions according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And remove the incision completely to extract all the humidity; and strengthen the incisions with cloth and feathers; and apply that which is on top of oil into the fifth day, and remove the scab and cure the wound with tests and ointments, and strengthen the skull with equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little humidity until the member is restored and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of water, which sometimes are more in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and then pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the collection of water, and do that which is most possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and engage it with a bandage, as this would cause the patient to suffer from gangrene and death due to the loss of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries that are close to the earlobes, called "hilasseysse".
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When a catarrh or abscess occurs in the thighs or chest, and it is known that this is the case, and you do not confuse it with other treatments, then this incision of those two arteries would be the cure for this.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to incise those arteries that run along the patient's neck, and you do not want them to appear, then rub the area with a rough cloth to prevent their appearance, and strengthen the collar of the patient with a cloth; and consider where the vein is located; and the locations of each of those arteries that are close to the earlobes, and they are hidden in only some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then approach the back with a probe, and insert each one into the space of each part that has been incised so that it reaches inside the bone, and that is for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the probe through the artery and cut it at the incision of the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if the length of the incision is too short, when any vein is incised, the blood flows out in a pulsating manner, which is often stopped by frequently applying pressure.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the back does not appear at the incision, then measure the thickness of the gold leaf and insert it into the space of three times, and then approach the probe to the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which is removed from the blood is about one drop, and it does not remove more or less, and all of this is according to the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the replacement of the backbone of the patient.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the cause of the pain, and if there is any reason for the bone to remain on the bone, then incise it so that it does not become an abscess carefully.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with feathers and strips of cloth, and then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	About the extraction of tumors that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or sharp tumor has formed in the temples due to humid and hot qualities, and is painful and similar to those, and is not cured by medical treatments, we have shown in these ailments the extraction of tumors from the temples, or cauterization of them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the patient feels pain in the temples; and understands the tumor that is apparent on the temple where it is shown by its side, and is hidden only in a few people due to the force of pressure.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then press the patient's neck with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or apply hot water until the tumor appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And here is the form of the spoon that you will use:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you will scrape the codex with this one until you reach the arch; and then get into it and extract the upper parts until you remove the codex and discover the parts of the tunics that were left there, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with this one at the end of the needle, and then cut off a part according to the quantity by which its ends were stretched and contracted, and do not leave any bleeding, because if they are not cut, the blood will not stop flowing.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then remove about an ounce of blood in three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the arch is large, then you will cover it in two places with strong double-sided tape or with cords that are long enough, and do not let it touch the putrefaction that prevents the consolidation of the wound and does not leave any bleeding.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut off the excess that is between two threads; and do that at that hour or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that area with the pointed cautery until it reaches the inner part of the bone, and it will be in the place of that wound work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better to do so if the patient has a fever or a scalded condition; for cauterization is one of those causes that help to finish the moisture, and therefore it is better in such cases.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover the removal of the ribs that press on the old wound site, and place them over the clean bandages made, and then apply dry medicines to heal the flesh and warm compresses until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while working on another wound, blood flows from the rib, at that time you should apply pressure to that blood, or with the pointed cautery, or whatever fills the old wound site, and press your hand until the blood is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any of those causes is not present, then place your hand over the location where the blood is flowing, and apply cold water to the area with great coldness until the heat subsides, and then press it as appropriate.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And the thing that is more useful in extracting bone is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, because you have sensed the two places where it enters and exits, and pause when they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that the part between its extremities does not become consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two points is as follows.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if the sharpness of two points is not enough, because if they approach each other too quickly, they do not cut the flesh but rather tear it.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, in those cases where there is some thickness, the heat of the fire should be applied to those places and the flesh should be cut more easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and more useful.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two points should be the thickness of the aforementioned.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of bodies affected by sharp and acidic wounds of the wounds.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acidic wounds are on the body of those who have veins above their forehead, and there is no cause for medical cure in that area, and the face of the patient becomes swollen and feels pain in their forehead as if they were suffering from a migraine, and the wounds of that person are extended, humidified in any way that their hairs are known, and their eyelashes are scratched by the acidity of their tears, the old remedies in the cure of those of this operation, and name that cure as the spread.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And if you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then incise three equal fissures along the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure is two as mentioned: the first fissure should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the eyelids that are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the first ribs that are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of the jawbones.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is equal to three fingers, adjust it.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge or dry cloths, use them to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then place the flat of two sharp edges, of which this is the shape of the incision of it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Scrape all the scar tissue that is between two incisions, and remove it from the incision towards the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then spread this flat and enter it into the first incision another time with another instrument called a lancet, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp side of the lancet on the flesh attached to the scar tissue, and the flat side on the bone, and push it until it reaches the second incision, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	While continuing to apply this remedy to the affected area, and then do so between the two fissures.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when enough quantity has been expressed from the bladder, express the places of the feet of the bladder congealed.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place your hand in each fissure, and place your hand on those powders that are in vinegar and oil and vinegar, and make sure that it does not become an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and then care for it with an ointment made from basilicon and rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the cure of gravels by cataplasms and the humors descending from the parts affected by the chapter.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When any pain from gravels continues and the humors descending from the parts affected by the chapter, and sometimes the eyes of the patient become weak and their sight is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and the eyebrows are falling off, and in the beginning of the chapter there is an acute pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you know for these accidents that the materials and cataplasms do not come from any other veins but those descending from the parts affected by the chapter.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for those is this: order the patient to turn their head, and then insert a small incision on the left side of the forehead (and start the incision from the right temple towards the left; and the incision should go through the bone), until it reveals the bone.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the pus with gauze or dry cloth, and then fill between the two lips of the incision with old cloth or cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then clean the wound with warm water and oil to prevent it from becoming infected.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the abscess has decreased, then scrape the bone until it begins to touch the flesh, and then apply the drying regimen that is made of flour and collofania mixed together, and apply it on the wound as if it were a natural part of the flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment of that which catches in the arches.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The entire cause that catches in the arches is one of four species: either it is a mineral stone or a similar cause to stone, such as iron and verdigris, or it is a plant such as celery or fava, or it is a fluxible cause such as water and vinegar and its similar substances, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when a stone catches in the arch or other similar cause to those causes that do not adjust or believe in the arch, and if the arch is exposed to the sun, and if you see the stone, it is distilled into some cause of violent oil or sage, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the patient sneeze by conditioning, and open the nose against the coming of a sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some cloths or wool around the arch, and extend the arch to the parts above, because these remedies are often forgotten in these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not obtained, then administer extraction with the instrument called the epicaricatory needle of this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If the needle is obtained, then it is good; otherwise, administer extraction with the thin needle of double puncture.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	If the needle is not obtained, then make a needle from iron and insert the end of the needle into the ear canal and seal the area around the needle with wax and softened beeswax so that it does not fall out except the needle.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then extract with the strong attraction of the instrument that we have found.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not obtained in this way, then take a piece of raw or prepared alum or the amount that is taken for the tongue, place it at the end of the needle, and cover it with a clean cloth placed on the side where it was placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then insert that into the ear canal and facilitate the ear from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	If all the causes that we have mentioned are not forgotten, then you should cut away that part which developed into an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of cutting away that part is to first bandage the patient's wound with the vein septic and remove the second bandage according to the method of the virtue of the patient, and then make a small incision between your fingers and convert the gold thread to the parts above, and do not put any grease in the location where the patient is most sensitive.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the incision is in the shape of a crescent until it reaches the bone, and the bone is found, then cut away that part which can be removed with appropriate instruments; and then make the incision in that hour at a fast pace, and cure that part before it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause is one of the gases that we believe and it is inflated, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your command, then you should take a thin spatula in this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer to that person the abscission of that stone which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do that when you think that that person is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place them in comfortable positions, and protrude those areas where there are nails or subtle gestures, or ab initially have such a thing, which is praised for the extraction of it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	May one use water that has entered the ear canal as a condition for sneezing, and fill the patient's ear with old wool, and put it over the ear in which the water is, and if it is expelled by that, it is good; and if not, take many thin needles according to the length of the said, and cauterize those in the fire a little, and the patient should insert one of those in the opening of their ear canal and strike it with another needle over the water in the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So do not stop that until all the water is expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And then the water is poured into a container that you take with paper or cotton, and put one end of it in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until it is completely burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put another cotton and do this many times until all the water is boiled, and remove that which is under the name of the extraordinary stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of beasts entering into that ear, if it is a small thing, it is cured with oil and a similar remedy, as we have said in the division; but if it is a large thing that causes pain to the brain, then administer the extraction of it by gestures and oncis, and the cause of it is more dangerous than all the other causes that are found in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worms that generate in the ear, when you cure that which we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not compare your remedy, then cover that you regulate the ear to the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if any cause of worms appears here, then extract that small or sharp instrument, but if no cause appears, then take a narrow and wide needle, like this is the shape of it:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the thin end of the needle into the earhole according to the amount that the patient can bear; then pull out strongly with that one, and make those movements, until all the worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if they do not obey you with the instrument, then open and close it in the circle of the candle as we have said; then administer distillations that have been previously prepared for the treatment of worms, and look for that in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your effusion is the one that you use to pour the medicinal oils into the earhole with this instrument, like this is the shape of it:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or copper, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and put it on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it should be as if they are in the cavity of the catheter of continence here where it is necessary to insert.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rag and wrap it around the end of the catheter decently, and then pour oil or some herb or any liquid from these medicines into the catheter — and that is in the syringe — and then insert it above and express the oil onto the patient's abdomen so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the catheter and the patient feels the oil penetrating.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is in the syringe should have already been heated by fire for a short time.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the substance you will distill into the syringe is not too cold, because the medicines of the syringe cannot withstand such cold.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the cure of obstruction of catheters.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children and some older people who have not been perforated in the abdomen, and that has happened to some men, obstruction in the flesh of the catheter by plague or by no meat at all in that; and this obstruction is sometimes made in the entrance of the catheter which does not allow the excrement to pass, and sometimes in the parts forward.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And in the case of a patient who does not understand the language, it is in the most difficult positions for treatment.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the case where you succeed in understanding the language, place the patient's ear to your lips and look at him.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an obvious sign, open that with the thin spatula of this shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it in which the width is small, one part is sharp and the other not; and the spatula is two lion feet long so that it does not touch the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the sign is caused by flesh born in the ear or in the chest, then use that thin and sharp needle to pierce it all before it is fully formed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the sign is in the front of the ear, then take a thin and sharp needle and hold it over the fire for a short time, and then put it into the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if the sign is caused by that which the patient finds difficult due to its weight, then press it with difficulty; and be careful not to press the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place a cloth of the second quantity, as wide as the opening of the wound that you have covered with the Egyptian poultice; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any other and insert it into boiling water and powder over it according to the triple recipe, and use it; and if you see that the cloth is already infected, then remove it and replace it with another one that you have wrapped in a cerate that is made with melted rose oil, until the infection has passed; and then care for it until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If there is an outflow of pus, then submerge a cloth or towel in cold water and place it over the wound, and use the other remedy that restricts the flow of pus, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the care of atezil, which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	When certain symptoms occur at the pores of the skin, some are wet and others are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you must hold the patient's hands or feet, and remove those spikes from their wounds, and place your hand over the affected areas accordingly.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is pain due to the flow of unclean blood, then you should cauterize those parts with a thin pointed cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cauterization is to remove the wounds and dry symptoms when they return to the cause of their wounds; and when the fire has been cauterized, those wounds are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of large swellings that come to the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Symptoms that occur in the eyelids are similar to large swellings in their strength and hardness, and because they increase, they are called so.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And there is a collection of thick humidity under and over the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation in them is to consider whether the greatness of it comes from what appears under the eyelid and is magnified to all parts; and the cause of it is unknown.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make an incision in that place through the fissure, and remove all parts that facilitate its escape, and suspend it with a cord and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you are not equipped with the incision of it if you do not put that it penetrates the eyelid at the incision by little by little, then in any case, it will not be noticed.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and heal it within that it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then you will not be harmed by that which the oil of it restores it and encases it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the greatness is declining to the parts under the eyelid, then remove the eyelid and suspend the greatness with a cord, another that you indicate of incision, and press it on all parts, and if the eyelid by the incision is elongated, then it will not be noticed in any case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash the wound with salted water; and care for the area with that which is inside that will heal it.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	About the treatment of swelling above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Swelling is gray, which is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and especially in those who are more affected by it, aggravating the wounds of those and causing them to lose their sight; and they cannot look at the light of the sun because of that which tears fall on them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you see them always speaking to their faces, and always speaking to their sleeping faces; and they have their eyelids closed with humid ones, which have already covered inflammation, and immediate danger of infection is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with those, you center infection within those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some way of operation is in that which the patient pauses his head on the pillow, and then pauses a cloth from him and from it makes a circle, and makes of it a circle according to the amount that contains all parts, and then pauses that over that and press all those that are in the middle of the circle, and then do in the middle of that humidity is incident on the fissure by latitude, and the fissure is not greater than the fissure that is made in flaubotomia.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the previous cavity where you are cutting the cord completely until you reach the arkernach, in the most common procedures, arkernach is done through a fissure according to the form of white glass.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	So extract those wet cloths that you have wrapped between the thighs called parts of the forehead and rotate between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to adjust in the fissure so that the space does not reach the wound and those below it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you do not see it at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust a small wet cloth in the fissure until you reach the arkernach; and then extract those we have mentioned; and then submerge cloths in water and vinegar and place them over the area and strengthen those wet cloths.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And know that they sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that that which remains of that wetness is removed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which is unhealthy.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs in the area, then treat it with healing ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of the methods of touching the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the edges of wounds are not adjusted by natural hairs and are antiquated, then those methods of harmfulness are used as persistent tears and softening of the eyelids and bandages until that which is the cause of destruction of the wound, which is called touching the wound, and cure is done in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by sharp medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization; or by making an incision and suture; or by cannulas as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore cover that you place the cap of the wound on your left; then convert the eyelid to your left hand, and if it is converted, it is good; otherwise, insert a needle in the part where the wound is closest to the edge of the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate from above, and that which is - near the margin of the eyelid where there are no hairs - near the hairs, and pull the thread upwards above the eyelid, and convert it to the right.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Approach the part of the eyelid behind the eyelashes and insert the spatula into the lacrimal canal; then remove the foreign body and place it under the eyelid, wiping it with a small piece of cotton or cloth, and then apply pressure on the eyelid with your finger, as if holding a fan.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is important to note that the shape should vary according to the degree of eyelid elevation, as this varies among men, and those who require a greater incursion into the eyelid should do so according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then approach the spatula over the two lines that you have pressed, and begin from the lacrimal canal to the lower lacrimal canal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural eyelashes and is as large as the king's.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the cotton in one of the two angles of the wound, and remove all the skin from there, and adjust the incision with the two lips of silk or thin wool, and remove the pus, and let any excess hang over two small strips of cloth, if you wish to do so, or not, it does not matter.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And after three or four days, approach the wound stitches.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, leave the wound stitches open, and treat that area with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and its attachment; but stitching is better. Therefore, do as the ancients did.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But rather, be attentive to the patient's comfort, and it is a good operation, and not in fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in taxanir, and it is that you should place a figure like a shield on the eyelid, and then lift the eyelid three fingers away and gather it according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do that, then take three fingers away and place the other end of the needle in the middle of the figure, and insert the first thread into the lacrimal major, and the second thread into the lacrimal minor, and adjust between those threads with the same thread, and then lift your hand up to the same level, and lift the entire eyelid on which it is recommended to be placed.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is inside to be healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If an abscess occurs at the beginning or end of your incision, cover that abscess with a plaster and similar ones, and apply ointment to it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Sometimes eyelids are turned inside out by their own hairs, so cover that which you have mentioned at the beginning with the same thing; but stitching in places where it is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To bandage the legs is done in this way:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and you should turn the eyelid and cut the figure that is according to what I have mentioned; and then make two narrow strips of cloth or narrow straps of the same length as the eyelid and their width being a little less than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already made an incision at the ends of each part where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add each narrow strip underneath that which superfluously covers the eyelid of the eye, and tie the strips of each part very tightly, and leave it for several days, until the skin by the tightness will die and become blackened and rotten.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is too late, then break the joints with hammers, and then cure the pain before it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not prick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make cans that you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	About raising the prickly hairs in the eye socket when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are unnatural hairs, hard, sharp and prickly, then the operation is as follows: you take a thin needle and place it in the soft silk and lemon, and then adjust the ends of it and notches them in a way that is very subtle.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the threads should be the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you should put another thin thread next to it in a short time, and if you want, cut the ends of that one.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and position it close to the sunlight so that your work can be clearly seen, as this is a delicate and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the eyelid at the point that requires suture, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid so that it does not come out naturally from the eye.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the eyelid up and insert that into the eyelid attachment, and use one to three or more but not too many.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand away from that which is outside the eyelid attachment in the eyelid and the eye naturally.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is not attached to the eyelid attachment, then attach it to the parts that you have composed to that, until it is attached to the eyelid attachment when the trauma occurs.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then apply it to the view of the wound, as you will attach it to the eyelid attachment and the eyelid, and grope around and clap the wound, and leave the cloth on for two or three days until the eyelid adheres to its place and heals over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the penis is too short, then you adjust a longer artificial penis than the natural ones, and elevate it to where it should be, or until it becomes long enough to fit in the space, and then elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	About the cure of ejaculation that occurs in the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it occurs in the lower eyelid, and the contraction of the eyelid when it is turned upwards, to the right or left part, due to poor consolidation of the eyelid or dryness or cauterization, and this is called leprosy, and whether it is natural or accidental, it is caused by poor consolidation of the eyelid or dryness or cauterization, or by similar conditions.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the method of the operation in that be that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it in that which is between those a cloth of linen, and tie them together when they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not use cures that dry out the causes of which they are dehydrated and constrained, because if you do that, it will return worse than at any time when they had no fire.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use those of causes that soften like fenugreek, and embrocate with the water in which they are soaked and cooked, or with dayquilon, which should be liquefied with some oils, and apply it to the affected area, and cure that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate all the matter that is not consolidated according to the form in which fire begins.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation, which we have said, is nothing but a certain correction of exacerbations that do not return the form of the place according to what fire gives.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of exacerbations that are made in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This exacerbation that is made in the eyelid, which is not called a vertical exacerbation; and it is of two kinds, one natural, another accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidents can occur due to injury, cuts, burns, or other similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of the operation for that is to take a needle with which you can make double thread, and place it in the flesh, and let the thread pass from the left lacrimal into the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh to the parts above the needle and hold it with one hand, and insert the other hand into the wide space.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the figure of the eyelid returns to its original shape, it is good; otherwise, take the needle and place it on the broken part, and convert that into an eyelid, and make the two cuts on the side of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And make the ends of the two cuts into two angles at the beginning, which you have made when they meet, and make an angle from them until they form a figure of their own.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter lambda: λ
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then place the flesh on that side for the amount that is left of it after being cut off from it, which is called the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with thread; and then care for them with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the wound is caused by a tear or suture or cauterization, then you should cut the flat suture on the eyelids according to what is prescribed.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the poultice between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the sermon on the cure of wounds when they are above or below, that it should run in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of wounds, and that is in the form of various shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the artisans always prepare everything in any way that is possible to do so within the time that they make the figure return to its natural form, or close to that, and the patient according to what is suitable for the operation and the tools in the best arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in men, the eyelid is adhered to the lower part of the eyeball, and it is prohibited from moving freely and performing its natural works, therefore you should insert the eyelid extender behind the eyelid, and raise it above or extend it towards the eyeball.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you insert the adherence into a thin space, which should not be sharp, having obtained a small amount of it so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remain the space that does not descend the eyeball from its acuity.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be made with ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and that the entire adherence is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put salt water in the eye, which you wash; or distill it in the form of a solution in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the swollen area under it, place a cotton pad soaked in warm water on the eyelid, and use the third day's tincture of strengthening remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI:
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the beginning of a fingernail and the height of flesh from the lacrimal bones.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You should know that the fingernail is of two kinds, either nervous, which is similar to a thin, hard shell; or non-nervous, which is like white moisture condensed, which when it touches the skin, often causes it to become infected and the skin does not heal in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And the non-nervous ones do not begin until the larger lacrimal bone, until it gradually covers the vision and prevents light and movement of the eyelid.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	If the fingernail is working at its beginning, then the patient should place their head in your lap, and then raise their eyelids, and with your hand lift the eyelid, and then gather the fingernail from the infected area and extend it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert a small piece of horsehair or cow hair or swan feather or similar, or strong silk, or gradually double the tip of the needle until it reaches the middle of the nail, and push it into the nail, and hold the nail firmly; and extend it to the parts above, and excoriate the nail with the hair on the side of the nail which is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then continue to push it into the back of the nail.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then insert the thin wire or small forceps into the corner of the lacrimal canal and lift the flesh of the lacrimal duct so that it does not become blocked and cause continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And also some of the nail on the side that was extended or firmly held, as we have said, and then scrape it with the lion's tongue-shaped instrument which is the shape of this.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the corneal tunica with the instrument and that it does not cause a rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Approach the beginning of the foot with a small amount of salt or saliva mixed with sage, and leave it there until the next day; and then care for that which has entered by that means to be healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not tender and you cannot insert the needle, nor does it stick on that spot, then this type of nail is cured by medicines, and it is healed as it would be with honey and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that, then you begin the thigh of the patient and take a thin lancet of sharp acuity according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with thinness.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is rarefied and confined and has entered into that spot, then sprinkle your urine in the thigh of sage mixed with sage or salt or saliva, and cover the thigh until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until everything that is in it has been removed, unless the opposite abscess is cauterized in the thigh, wherefore you leave that and heal the abscess when it is ready to be healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And continue your operation until they are healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	If the lacrimal gland is noticeably swollen and causing great discomfort, it should be removed with an onion; and incise a part of it, but do not completely remove it to prevent excessive tear flow.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a drop of rose oil into the lacrimal canal until they are healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of incising gazzenic and of that which is born from flesh adjusted in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some flesh sometimes born in wounds is red and is over-padded until it covers the pupil, or it approaches or stretches on the eyelids and strongly holds the eyelids together at the parts of the wound and is assembled like a balustrade rose.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation is performed by placing the patient's head on the table; and then open the wounds of that and collect all that flesh with an onion, and that with a forceps or a spoon; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is all finished with the cutter, and guard yourself from the wound that you do not descend that which is your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And if you have inserted a needle or a small forceps that we recommended in the beginning of this chapter, or small scissors, collect them as soon as the shape of the bone comes close to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then, when your incision is completed and the entire flesh has been removed, fill the wound with salt-soaked cloth, or sprinkle it with powdered herbs similar to corrosive medicines, and place a piece of albumen into the wound before ensuring that an abscess does not form.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any reason to suspect infection and you are not sure of its cause, and you fear an abscess forming, then cleanse the wound and treat that abscess with whatever remedy is appropriate for that type of abscess, and repeat this operation until it is healed, and similarly treat any affected flesh that occurred in the wound of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But if you have any doubt about the complete healing of the wound from natural or accidental causes, do not use iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you are sure that that member has suffered this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the collection of blood in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Blood vessels that are turgid over the wound and prevent the surgeon from performing their operation, and they develop the wound with the passage of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the wound in which there is blood is strong and in it there is no other disease than blood, then you collect that blood.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And if you command the patient to place their head in your hand, and suspend those veins with an elastic band or two according to your judgment; and that band should be of soft double thickness according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two bands gradually in one layer according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then those veins are collected with soft elastic bands, by their softness, and wipe away the sanctuary hour by hour, until those veins are again visible from the wound and are turned over.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not injure the wound with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation in the morning gives light, and you are motivated to continue in your operation, then do not incise only those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, you will dilute the remaining white or red wine in the empty vessel to cool down that which remains from the sable.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If you cannot obtain all of it at that time, then apply all the remaining wine to relieve their pain, and leave them for several days until the pain is relieved and they are protected from infection.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the process after the swelling has subsided until they are healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the form of forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On reducing hernias to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat hernias with cauterization or acute medicine after the story of it has been told and it is not healed, do not insert into it but cut through the abscess to drain all the fluid that is in it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then use this instrument:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And if it is named an acute head, and made of iron, and the cap is redone with a sharp point like a lancet or a needle for subtle puncture (like in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Then place that over the corrupted part of the bone, and slowly rotate it between your fingers until you know that that corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And that should be done several times, and then restore the place with drying and hemostatic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the place is consolidated and it is in good flesh and the wound heals for 40 days without recurrence, without abscessation, and without accident, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and in this way: and you should use a sharp iron or medical instrument, and when it is revealed like this, then take a tribe in this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The external part of the iron is triangular, and its end is first extended into the extremity as much as possible.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place that one on the bone, and the other near the lacrimal; and move your hand a little bit away from the hole, and then rotate your hand inside the tribe until it penetrates the entire bone, and that one feels the patient's pain as if he were breathing through his mouth when you touch his hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, the area is restored with astringent medical remedies that are similar to those you have used before.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, since the flesh and the area are hardened, the matter that was flowing to the parts of the body returns to its source, so that is less painful for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of the reduction of the elevation of the hole.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hole elevates to its totality and does not occur in the excretion of harm or reduction, then cover the patient, and make sure that it follows, and place some bandages on the neck for good success; and place a liniment on the hole made of acacia, aloe, and sarsaparilla, and strengthen the plaster on the hole with some powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The method for treating the feet is to use cloths from lion's manes, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; then make those cloths into what is needed.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then place one over the other according to the amount needed for the required purpose.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then apply strong pressure with a durable, tightly wound cloth; and repeat the successive applications of the incisions; and then remove the cloths and let the affected area rest straight for the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	However, if the tendon becomes too soft, then it should be kept straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then remove the cloth and let it rest as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the affected area has already been reduced, then apply the ointment to the feet and the pressure and the cloths until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	About the beginning of the eminence of the uveal membrane.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the uveal membrane, and it emerges and protrudes out of the eyelids as if by a grain of sand, and it takes on the shape of a man through that, and you want to incise it, then the operation is performed as we have recommended, which is that you insert the needle into the uveal membrane from the part below upwards, and then insert another needle double the length of the lacrimal duct, and make that penetrate, and leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the doubled-over part and lift it away from the uvea along the path of the needle, and apply pressure there.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then carefully remove the needle and place it on the woollen cloth soaked in a solution of alum and vinegar until the thread is completely absorbed.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then take care to apply that which comforts the one who is suffering from the disease until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some women gather all the pieces of cloth together in a circle and adjust them to be large enough, and then pierce it with a thin needle that reaches the bottom of the cloth, and remove the moist alumine, and lower the cloth and put it inside quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then apply strength until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of gout.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease that is called gout is not other than a kind of inflammation that is adjusted in the cloth like descending water and is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The way to work in it is that the patient should lie down on the bed prepared and dressed, and then take the main vein in your two hands and hold that which enters when the disease reaches the parts behind, and then dry it and do not let it descend, and stop the blood, and the patient will see the causes as he used to.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not descend, you will know that it is a fever.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descent is not prepared, then have the patient lie between your hands and take a thin spatula and put it on the conjunctiva and continue until the edge of the cornea in the corona (where the eye is), until the fever is gone.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, when the fever is gone, you will pour in the dragon's blood water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already made a fenugreek and honey mixture.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the other causes until they are healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure of the water descending from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which one is suitable for piercing according to the speech declared, then that one.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then make sure you have the patient lie between your hands on a pillow and hold their eye shut tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your hand near the eyelid of the patient's eye, if the eye is on the left side; or place your hand directly over the eye if it is on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And place your hand with a sponge on the right side if the eye is on the left; or place your hand with a sponge on the left side if the eye is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the end of the sponge near the cornea for the large canal in the eye's corner on the side of the lower lacrimal gland; and then wet the sponge with virtue and rotate your hand over it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And penetrate into the eye's corner and feel that the sponge has reached the cause of the view.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And make sure that the length of the sponge is the same as the distance from the edge of the pupil to the end of the eyelid, which is the cornea of the eye; because you will see the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place your hand in the location where the water is, and then throw another cloth over it, and if the water descends, then cover the patient with a blanket over which they can see, and then place it on their own bed.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then pause for a moment; if the water is descending, then pause at that other cloth in front of which there is not yet any soiling.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is dry and not descending, then you remove the cloth gently, and rub it with your hand a little at a time, and then dissolve a small amount of clear gem salt in the water and wash the bed with that; and then place a clean, dry cloth outside the bed, or a linen cloth infused in rose oil and album of egg and bind it to the bed.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	And also those that we have used in our time on that comb with album of egg.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey the cloth to the instrument of the bed because of its hardness -- which is one of those men whose bed is hard --, then cover it with the spatula that is called the backrest of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that joint at that point, do not leave your hand in the wound, and see if you are not making a shallow incision.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then enter the second joint as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should prepare the patient for their bed, lying down comfortably on their back in a dark room, and prohibit all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place your hand on that part of their body to prevent it from becoming sore and not irritate their head at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And the bandage should be according to its position by the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that from the dark room and expose the free view, and make them see some causes, and then return the bandage by the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not do that during the time of healing or soon after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having said that, you should remove it so that the water can flow more freely and strongly through the vein.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If a boil breaks open, remove the pus underneath it within seven days, and treat that area with something that will help heal the boil.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you should observe the patient's face and place your hand on their mouth to prevent them from vomiting for several days, as they are in a state of darkness.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually remove that hand and discuss with them about their causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in some cases, the disciple of sight does not excuse any visuals, and then you should be careful about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have heard of some of those who are in Arctic, and some say that they make fire in the Arabian desert by piercing a hole through which water comes out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen any evidence of this in our land, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancients; and it may be new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magic by which one can control those who do not know about those things:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	If the joints are naturally made of bone or iron, and their outer parts are this subtle triangle shape, with the sharp end like that of a triangle.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	About the cure of meat in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are different meats that are adjusted from among which is some cause, such as a scorpion-like bone or polyps; and this disease is called polyps because it resembles that animal represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from there meat cancer, the black one, of dark color; and from there it is meat lion not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is among these lion meats not fraudulent or cancerous, cover the patient's hands and place them in the sunlight, and open the nose of it, and pick out the meat from those.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the parts of the body, and then cut that which you have understood from those sharp space subtle of one part into which you know that all the meat is already stopped; because if there is any cause of the reason for which the abscission is possible, then you will remove that with one of the small instruments to facilitate it.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the lord has a boil or an abscess that has not been opened, then pause at that place; or it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cover and cauterize that part which has been completely drained and all the cavities have been closed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then gather some salt and vinegar or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is opened and moisture is introduced into the palate, then know that it is healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate after covering, then know that there is no flesh in the bones of the nose to the places where it has not been drained.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, cover that place where there is some swelling, and blow in the mouth noses, and pause between each blow the amount of the said or word, and engage the patient and introduce one end of the tube in the nose with the ray or another cause which is possible at that time.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And as soon as that is done, draw the smell into the nose so that it reaches the canals of the nose, and sit on the same side, because too many children at school do the same action, and it is the cause of that which one wants to do.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place the two outer parts of the patient, one part that is on the nose and the other that is in the nose, and then administer a lock of meat at the patient's nostrils, and do this when you know that the meat is already at the patient's nostrils.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the patient, and place in the nose an abstraction of salt water, and do this for three days or more until the rotten meat is completely removed from the nostrils.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the cause, place in the nose a tube of lead to prevent air from entering for a while until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if the cure does not work, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to purge the nostrils with which they are distilled oil and medicines in the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do this with silver or copper, which is similar to a small lamp covered, and the meat in the same way.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed canula like this with cane, and the cannula of the instrument to purge the nostrils and it is flat, exposed; to which has a handle at the back of it, which you hold when you insert in it oil or water that you want from the sucs and from the sucking causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this is the prescription for this purge: recipe of castor beans, white bay leaves, ginger, mustard seed, long pepper, cloves, and spikenard, mixed with honey and vinegar, made into pills, and one pill dissolved in warm water, and given to the patient.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25:
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Regarding the noses outside the nostrils.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	If the nose is not straight outside the nostrils, it is considered magnificent and often in other days when it is looked at from the side.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for that reason, you should incise that at the beginning of its appearance, and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place your hand over the area or use a cautery or medicine that burns where the disease was.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the incision is made late before it becomes magnificent, then consider whether it is hard, black, of little sensation, and does not touch that which is a postema crancos; for those who incise this abscess until it is completely healed by the great malice over that which it had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the abscess is yellow and not black in color, and it is possible to incise it entirely, then evacuate the patient and incise that same spot, and cure the wound with a mixture of dry and tightly packed material until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of sutures of the nose and lips and ear when their continuity is dissolved by wounds or similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You should know that when the continuity of one of these cartilages is dissolved, it is not advisable to perform that operation on another person.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, if there is any cause for those wounds, consider whether it is a fresh wound or not, and then you should adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure that area until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the dissolved continuity are already separated, and each one is healed, then you should examine that each part of their external skin does not have a wound.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with stitches and tighten those, and above them sprinkle powder of dragon's blood and three grains of triple powder, and place a plaster of diaphinicon or any other consolidating plaster on top, leave it on for two days or three, then remove that and replace it with another plaster and leave it on until the abscesses are healed, and then cure it with ointment.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The solution of continuity or needles that you add to the stitches should be the same as we have recommended in the abdominal stitch, or add the solution of continuity as you see fit and let it be known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the parts divided.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Some abscesses are found in the divided parts of the lips of some people, similar to hard pustules, and sometimes they are smaller and sometimes they are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then cover each of those hard parts with a bandage and fill the wound with healing ointment until the bleeding stops, and then clean the area with warm water and treat it with a remedy that has styptic properties until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	About the beginning of flesh that is adjusted to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Then cover that area with a bandage or hold it with forceps and insert it into the place where the tooth was, and let the blood flow or leave the wound open.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then place a compress or powder with styptic or astringent properties on the wound.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If that flesh returns, then insert it again secondarily and cauterize it, so that the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	About the reason for teeth made of iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When sharp, rough, and sometimes black scales are adjusted to the surface of the teeth of the dead and of those in the forum, and between the gums, they are made of iron and are yellow or green inside, and they are the teeth that are left behind.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so you should apply a warm compress between the patient's thighs and place their head on your lap, and remove any teeth that appear to be causing similar damage, such as sharp stones or other objects that have not caused any harm. This is done with a black cloth and lemon juice and other substances that are known to be beneficial.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If that is the case at the beginning of the reasoning, then it is good; otherwise, you should repeat the reasoning on those parts on the other day and the second and third until it reaches the end of that which you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	You should know that teeth require different shapes and sizes of tools according to the operation you are performing.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	In order to prevent the tool from damaging the surrounding parts of the tooth that is being cut and another tool used between the teeth in different shapes, and these shapes of tools you should prepare as follows:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of Tooth Extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	When you cure the tooth from its pain, it takes a long time and is completely removed, because there is no cause that replaces the essence of the tooth when it is removed, because the substance is sublimated into which the extraction is made.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the patient is lying down to have that tooth removed, you must be certain which tooth is causing the pain, because sometimes the pain deceives the patient and they think it is a healthy tooth, and you remove that one and the pain does not stop until the bad and painful tooth is completely removed, as we have already seen in the operation of the wisdom teeth.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you know which tooth is causing the pain, and if you do not know, then you should incise around the tooth in a place where there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum on all sides, and then remove that part with scissors or fine forceps little by little until that part is removed.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Approach the patient's head with large hands for good communication or to stop strong bleeding, and place your cap on the patient's head so that it does not fall off, and approach the second tooth in a straight manner that does not cause more pain to the patient or the doctor.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it under the patient's body to facilitate and ease the removal of the patient as it is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or damaged, then cover that wound with cloth and tighten it with a thin thread at the end to prevent it from being broken during your construction over that area.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And cover that wound with cloth and guard the strength of your instrument so that it does not break during the incision around all part of the gum and return over the patient for the greater evil than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And guard yourself that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their practice and audacity on the eradication of them, which they do not administer what we have recommended; for those who are vegetarian cause great harm to people, which are more difficult than being broken, and the reasons of their removal are all, or some of those, or that extracts that area with the bones of the mandible as with those who have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then the mouth is cleaned with water or with vinegar or salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is a flow of blood from the wound, then use vinegar or sage and sprinkle some on the wound, and if it does not stop bleeding, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and how to hold them subtly are those that are used to extract teeth at the beginning of long extractions, with a short handle and thick, so that they do not bend when you have to perform such actions.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And there are times when using a thick handle is necessary until you have to perform such actions, and then the extractions are short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are made of Indian iron or straight extraction tools, and in the extractions of those, there are teeth of which some are inserted into others and are extracted with great force, and sometimes they have the shape of the beak of a ciconia bird, which is strong.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and the extraction of bones from impacted jawbones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you have to remove a tooth that is impacted, first place your hand on the location where it is stuck for a day or two until that location becomes soft; then insert forceps with a beak shaped like the beak of a bird called a ciconia or guanat, the shape of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	Their beaks were made with a knife or scissors.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if they do not obey your command to open with these forceps or scissors, then place your hand on the jaw and dissect all the flesh and insert the instrument that has the name of atali, it is a small lever, its shape is like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if it is short and has a thick end, use a small one, and not too thick so that it does not stick.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the jaw is broken, it is good; and if not, use these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular forceps with some roughness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument should be triangular and have a more delicate tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you have already helped with this instrument having two prongs, such as the following is the appropriate form:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And other instruments that will be needed for tooth extraction; since it is made like a large awl, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular tip bent or short, which should be somewhat thick, and not too thin so that it is not broken.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And other wise that the teeth extraction tools are made like the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the craftsmen be skilled and subtle in the art, at least as much as they know the operation and various diseases; for some of these diseases are of such a nature that the ancients did not say or describe a proper instrument, because of the different forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	May it be broken if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth, or if it is decayed, then carefully remove it from its location and use the appropriate instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the teeth roots, and help you with this tool, which is the following form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any swelling, do it little by little, and string it or hold it at the mouth so that it does not escape or leak until the bone is completely drilled; and then restore the place with appropriate medical remedies for that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small hole in the bone, then remove that and its black matter, and cure it before it becomes healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	About the care of prominent teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent and do not naturally follow their own course, and this is especially common in women and more so in older women; therefore, consider whether another tooth is close to it and if there is no possible way to extract or remove it, then you should remove that tooth. But if it is not attached to another tooth, then you should use this instrument to remove it. It resembles a pig's tusk, and it should be made of Indian steel with a sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	If the tooth is inserted into the gum for several days due to its hardness, and it is not accompanied by other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the tooth is prominently exposed to the gum, then use this Indian iron file of which this is the shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it is all made of Indian iron and the edge alone; and it is also of small pointed needles, like those that are made into needles, by which the tooth should be filed a little at a time for several days to facilitate its removal, so that no other tooth becomes attached and falls out.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then line up the tooth with the gum, and remove it with an elevator.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if the tooth is one that has been touched by saliva and the tongue, then cover it with a cotton swab to prevent the dental fragment from becoming rough and breaking off, and to fill it completely so that the tongue does not descend and the word is not corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents occur to teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or impact, and the patient cannot bear that which hurts, and you have cured it with medicines of styptics, and your cure has not been successful, then use gold instead of silver, because silver turns black and soon becomes poor, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And if the gold is of such subtlety and roughness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the method of the repair is that you take the gold and double it between two healthy teeth, and make sure that the two ends of the gold fit between two decayed teeth, or if one or both are missing, until the thread reaches the tooth of the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the cementing to the part where you began, and strengthen your hand with skill until it is not decayed.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your strong string should be used to pull out the teeth that are stuck.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then carefully remove the excess tissue around the tooth with forceps or pliers, and place those in each location to hold them, and turn those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that they do not cause damage to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then carefully lift that narrow space with a Roman instrument.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is broken or cracked, pull out that or those with another tooth in such a manner that it is strong in all its time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the shape of healthy teeth and the figure of the straightness of two healthy teeth and two decayed ones, as shown in these:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is returned to the cavity of each in such locations, and they are re-created as we have recommended, and they remain strong.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only skilled craftsmen and wise people do that.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some wedges are adapted to some cause of the cow's bones, and they are made from them in such a shape of a tooth, and they are placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and they are strengthened as we have said, and they remain and serve for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	At the beginning of the tongue, which prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that connects the tongue to some muscles, which is sometimes natural or accidentally caused by pressure, and has already been consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the patient, his own head being present; and he raises his tongue, and then inserts that nerve ligament according to the latitude until the tongue is released from its previous position.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is some difficulty or stiffness in that area, and this is due to consolidation of pressure, then you should cut it with a knife along the latitude until it has been incised and the stiffness has been dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to make a hole in the front of the meat and that you cut here an arc and blood comes out from the wound.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the footprints of the incision with fresh water or vinegar or clean water; and then place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from moving, as this is the one that the patient held in his mouth in each new position so that it is not consolidated again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If the intestine is perforated, pause over the location of the wound with a triangular piece; if the intestine is wounded, then cauterize the location with a silver needle that suits that wound.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And approach that cure with the other causes until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	About extracting a ranula from under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, due to the tongue, abscesses similar to a small prohibited name occur, preventing the tongue from performing its natural operation; and it is often magnified until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in this case is to open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of dark or black color, hard, to which the patient does not feel pain, then do not touch that part which is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is declining to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you put the onion in it, and incise that with a thin spatula, and incise it from all parts; and if the intestine bursts during your operation, then you pause over the triangular piece, which is the vetriol, until it is restrained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work before the patient has recovered from the treatment, before they are washed with vinegar and salt; and cure that one while you cure the other with this treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36:
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of abscesses from the armpits and of that which is in the groin and of the other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess occurs in the groin, it is the glands that are similar to cotton, which are deformed and are called armpits, which when you cure them with what we have said in the division and are not healed, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of black color, of little pain, then do not touch that one with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the pus is thick, then do not touch that one with iron for fear of infection; leave it until it is matured, and then either you will burst it or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white in color, smooth, and its surface is thin, then this is what should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation in it is that you consider, depending on your operation, if the abscess has completely healed or if there has been any reduction; and then squeeze the patient by the sun, and the head of it should be in the palm of your hand, and open the mouth of it, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of it, leaving the instrument, which is a very noble tool:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or of iron, and it should be thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press that tongue and it shows you the abscess, and catches on that your palm, then take lancet and place that in the abscess, and pull that to the parts forward as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or another thing that you pull from some of the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is similar to forceps, but the outer parts are curved, so that the tip of each of those is at the end of the other, sharp, which should be made of iron and sharp.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	And if this instrument is not at your disposal, then insert the blunt end of the following tool, which has the shape of this one: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have inserted one nail, insert the other following this method of insertion, and then remove the insertion from the patient with clean water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a flow of blood, wash the wound with water from the decoction of milled barley or of marsh-mallow and similar to those of the hemostatic causes, within which the flow of blood is restricted, and then apply care until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes, some abscesses are also found in the groin, or other pustules like those two aurelhas, and insert those following what I said in the insertion of two nails equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in her groin, the abscess tended to a dark color, with little pain, which had already closed her groin, and the woman was breathing straight meat, and had already prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and had already reached death if more days passed.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The abscess had become so large that it had made two openings through the skin for two drains.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, I made an incision in one of the openings, and pulled out that one, and poured out a large portion from it, and then I incised the other part of the wound, and closed the mouth of the abscess, and covered her tongue, and then I placed the opening in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I drained a large part of it, but not all of it, just a little of the pus.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the groin of that woman was completely healed, and soon she started drinking water, and then she began to eat food, and I did not stop incising that abscess for a long time, and another abscess formed in its place, which I incised when it became large.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, you should apply heat and cauterize the wound of the patient, as needed; then approach and do not clean what God has done in that area.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	About the beginning of an abscess when it is formed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh affects the abscess and it is formed and long, it is not called perpendicular; and if it is in the part behind, thick and round, it is then called a boil.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When the abscess is cured with what we have said in the division, and you do not compare your treatment, and if you have already seen that the pus has been removed from it and is thin, then cut open that which is aggregated round; and if it is at a length, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and not at the center, then cut into the beginning of it, where there is fear over the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that which follows the method that I have said of its whiteness and length, then make the patient lie down and prepare the instrument by which you process its shape and place the opening on the new one, and draw it out and cut open that with one of two instruments which are called in the beginning of two needles.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And make sure not to insert anything else there, but only that which is adjusted according to the natural term of its addition, for if you insert more, you will cause it to speak again.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then, use what we have recommended for the incision of two moles, and cure that before it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient was frightened by the incision of it, then use anesthesia in the cauterization of it, and the manner of the cauterizer is not just sharp water, but you should place the head of the patient on your thigh, and take the tongue of the instrument that we have said, and take the water that we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and apply it to the living cause, and do not press too hard or thinly, and from this fill the hollow of the instrument which has this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The external part of it should be filled with the cavity in which the medicine is placed like the cavity of a spoon, and place the instrument on the wound, and the patient should lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person enters through the intrinsic medicine, so that no cause remains on the surface of it and that this is not caused by that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then bring your hand to the medical instrument, and express it onto the uvula for several hours until it becomes denigrated and sedated by the bite of the instrument.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a swab and wrap that over the end of the ray, and submerge the swab in the medicine, and insert the ray into a super-thin needle until the swab adheres to that needle, and do this so many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and leave it there for three days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat that, and after the cauterization clean it in the circuit of the uvula with a soft cloth, and modify what is in the circuit of the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and cure it from the inflammation, and give gargles until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of cure is better than the beginning and longer than the fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some wounds are cured with a substance that is more subtle than cauterization and begins like this: take camphor, hyssop, origanum, rue, scorched Arabic pepper, camomile, broth, and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all these causes or some of them in a bowl, and they should be submerged in hot water and boiled; and the bowl should be well washed with decent water, and there should be a small hole in the middle of the bowl where an instrument made of brass according to this method can be placed on top.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the tip should be inserted into the mouth of the patient before the steam reaches the uvula on the tongue, before the uvula becomes blurred.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this treatment until it dries, and be careful not to perform this cure at the onset of an abscess, because it would adjust too much in the abscess, and do not think that you should do this, but rather declare the presence of the abscess carefully.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument present, then take a cane and place a piece of charcoal at the end of it, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, as the charcoal prevents the smoke from burning their mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter thirty-eight.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of splinters and of what sticks to the wound and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Splinters or other foreign objects stick in the wound.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then cover what you see with your eyes, as you use an instrument called a probe to examine the wound, so that you can determine what is inside it.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not visible and is hidden in the wound, cover it with a piece of bread or rice or a cloth, or take a sponge and squeeze it firmly onto the wound, as when the cause of the wound is expelled by vomiting, or when the patient swallows a piece of bread or rice or a cloth, or when you use a sponge to absorb the blood, the hidden splinters are also removed.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And then take an eel and cook it with a little salt, and remove the bones; or take a porous substance and place it on the wound and cover it with a bandage.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if you do not remember those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of the following form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be a bit larger than a small one, and on the outside of it, there is a cavity that you can place in the patient's mouth to facilitate.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And the patient's head is elevated in suspension, and be careful that the touch of his jawbone, so that it does not cause any damage to him or the needle, or what the doctor places on his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But if the patient knows where the cause is located and can place it on the ground, and pull his hand up to the instrument, all this should be done according to the amount that is prepared for him before he forgets.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of blood attached to the jawbone.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When bloodletting is performed with the method we mentioned in the division of the cure of medicines and not with the lancet, consider this at the gullet of the patient while sunbathing, as you have understood the language of the instrument that you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see bloodletting, extract it with a small or precisely made instrument.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract that, then take a concave canula and insert it into the gullet of the patient, and place a heated iron in the concavity of the canula, and do this for as long as the bloodletting is dead and does not come out of the gullet, and keep the patient without water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a full wet cloth and open the mouth of the patient with that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not let any cause touch it, and let the water remain for an hour, then another on their hand, where the bloodletting is now as if it were the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If the recommended remedy has not been forgotten, then sprinkle the patient with chamomile or asafetida using the instrument recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do that, in four steps.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another way of performing the fumigation is as follows: take an open container filled with burning coals and cover it with a cloth that has a small hole in the middle; place this instrument in the hole; then stop the fumigation; place the patient's mouth over the end of the canula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not wasted until you know that the fumigation has reached the lungs, as the lungs are quickly affected.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not catarrh, then repeat the fumigation more frequently, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salted and other foods, and not drinking water, and if necessary, this diet should be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument used to treat gout in the foot; it resembles forceps at times, but has some curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed on the foot, and its end resembles a heron's beak, which grasps, in which it is rubbed with a file, so that when any cause is found, it does not leave it.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the speech on the treatment and incision of abscesses.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are special masses, of various shapes, according to the memory of them from each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are different in incision and section of them by various methods, one of which is for the special kind of abscesses that penetrates into itself; and because it understands the moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the locations where the disease occurs in the body, such as the abscess in the head is different from the abscess in the anus; and the abscess in the flesh is different from the abscess at the joint; and each of them has a proper treatment.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And moreover, some abscesses that are not perforated before maturation of the pus in them or their completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses that are supposed to be punctured when they are ready, and are not matured according to their completion, such as abscesses that are near the joints, when an abscess approaches a joint, it is prolonged inside until the pus in it is drained, and often the tendons or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is matured, it will cause damage to the principal member; or it is near the anus, so puncture this unripe one; and do not puncture it crudely, from incomplete digestion, but the one that is near the anus, so that it does not drain the stool of that member and is prolonged to the parts inside the anus, and it is made a fistula, or that it is made in the term of it that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When you know that you are aware of the time for the puncture of the abscess, and it is when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is ripe when the pain and fever subside, and the reduction of swelling and pulse, and the increase in the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you know that the puncture should be made in the area just behind the abscess and where the pus is coming from the inflammation.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should be made quickly through the long bone of the body or the body, if the abscesses are in the joints of the legs or feet, and in the location of the tendons, nerves, arches; and at the back, in all places equally in which it does not reflect; because in those that reflect, use puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in fleshy places, it is customary to delay the puncture until after the digestion of that part according to the complement, as we have said; because if you puncture that part before, the duration of the poor's life and movement is prolonged, and greatly increases the swelling and depth of that part.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	If the abscess is not perforated according to the size of the flesh or the urgency, or according to what the member needs.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if you administer a small perforation, in large abscesses, a large and wide or deep incision according to the size of the abscess.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses, where the cord is in the abdomen and is incised, when it is done so that the pus is removed and the wound is closed, as in the case of a hernia and a bubo.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that have incised sections with three angles; and of those that are incised as if with the shape of a belt of myrtle, as in the case of abscesses in the groin.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those that are incised with round and crescent-shaped incisions, similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	If the one who does not have any incision similar to those is suffering from superficial abscesses, then you should make a shallow or just a simple incision.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the abscess is large and has already collected a lot of pus, do not hesitate to pierce it; take out a part of it, and on the next day, remove a larger part, and gradually continue this process until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is very weak, or has a broken bone, or is a child, an elderly person, or in advanced old age, where the animal spirit is more mature and resolved with the exit of the pus, and often the patient dies, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be very careful with this chapter when performing incisions on these abscesses, so that you remove the pus and consider whether the pus from the abscess is little, or is a flat section; then you administer drugs of it or of a similar kind; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the incision are wide, then gradually continue this process until they meet.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If part of the tendon is removed from the abscess or if it has been cut in that area, then cover it with old or new cloth, as when you have treated wounds or sores, their moisture; and strengthen it with a third day; and then process it and cure it with that which comes from the ointments that enter before it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	However, if there is bleeding during the operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar in those cloths, and place that cloth over the location of the bleeding wounds.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	However, if the bleeding persists, then cover it with a remedy and cure, and powder those that have been recommended in various places of this our book and of division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	However, if it is in the winter and the location of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then cover it with powder in vinegar and oil, and place those on the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is in summer and the wounds are fleshy, then cover them with powder made from ground bread and oil or vinegar and oil, and let this be done on the third day, as we have said, and then remove the pus and clean that area and administer to the patient whatever is appropriate for their healing within the time it takes to be cured.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses in general, but according to the method of distinction that I have already mentioned, each abscess is cured differently by its own specific means.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	About the incision of abscesses that occur in the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	Small abscesses in the neck, and especially those that contain tunics that are specific to them; and their species are their names.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And some of them are pointed, and those that contain moisture similar to honey.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And some of them contain moisture similar to honey and pollen, and those that are rocky and hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In the section of all, and in the extraction of those, one does not fear, as one should not make opposition to the extraction of those.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you should use an instrument in the form of which you can approach it, which is called a trocar, as long as you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If what contains is moisture, then split that instrument according to its length by section on the surface in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section of the line of B until the line of G. Then, as the moisture is evacuated, you should scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, because too many wounds return, if there is any cause of it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian wax, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that the plague and leave it inside for another day, because that water corrodes all that which is from that layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeat the process of applying the Egyptian eggplant second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no cause for that skin condition; then cure the problem with the eggplant until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you should incise it with this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a sharp cut in the shape of a cross, and then make an incision between two lips of the cut and scrape that from all parts, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your surgical skills are not up to par, then do what I have previously told you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, treat the abscess with incision and healing as we have previously told you; incising over an abscess that has already been drained is less painful, because it has little pus and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some people have such abscesses that they never get wet; the cause is that when you incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and then squeeze the abscess, it feels like a deaf stone, rough, white, which cannot be washed, and if anyone touches it, they will be harmed.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other cases of abscesses in the head or this is not this chapter, as the abscesses that come to the heads of children and must be explained by the reasons of the haloes, but the section of all these should be a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the perforation of those from the lower part of them so that the matter of the insanity to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And apply that which is appropriate for that of cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses occur in the neck and in the armpits and in the elbows; and some occur in the other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those which occur in the neck, and those which are engendered between them, and all scrofula of those is within its own tunic, and as with the nodes and abscess of the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the special types of these scrophulas are moles, some of which are stony, and some of which contain moisture, and some of which are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you see of good disposition in the Touching, the color of which is propitious to the color of the codena, and is not afflicted at all parts, and is not annexed to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the ribs, and is not prone, but rather raised, cut that one from the dry surface of the part above the part below the backbone between the lines of .G. and .B., and scrape that from all parts, and extend two blades of the codena to the skin, or to the moles if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more caution not to cut the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And the space should not be too sharp, so that it does not adjust your hand to the incision, or disturb the patient, and that you do not cut what is not necessary to cut; because if you were to cut a vein or ribs and prohibited from your operation, then pause in the place of the tissue trissat or other powders which keep the flux of pus, and clean the place, and leave that inside which has paused the acuteness of the abscess and the tissue is becoming softened and is beginning to be suppurated.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the bone is removed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation before you complete it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if there is any cause for the other small scrofulas, then enter those and cleanse those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large scrofula vein, then do not enter that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you cut it with a sharp knife and cut it within so that it does not harm itself or others.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cotton that you have already immersed in Egyptian mud, and then heal that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you enter that scrofula entirely, then cut the two lips of the wound and squeeze out as much pus as possible so that there is no excess remaining.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess remaining due to the size of the scrofula, then cut the root of that and drain it and administer sutures and that which is called.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And in the case of scrofula that contains humidity, make a superficial incision where you see the location of maturation of the swelling, and stop the incision at the bottom of the neck, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the incision with ointment and similar substances to those used for wounds, in order to corrode that which is causing the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound is already clean, then cure it with a generative ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the drying of the core of an accidental abscess through the skin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients used this method in the abscess, and no one has seen any man in our land who made it that way.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of their speech.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men who have curvature, be careful that the extraction of the abscess is not done so that it does not cause damage to all the veins and major parts of the patient.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	When there are boils in the mouth or throat or two eyelids, when the illness is not in the bone, cut away the section of the skin to prevent the loss that is caused by suppuration.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when you want that, cut away the skin in three circles of the skin's circles, or four small sections for the length in the area between two circles by quantity, which the section is in cipher, not in cartilage, and this location is suitable for incision, which is private from flesh and the sinews of the bone are softened.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is afraid, then extend the tongue of the throat outwards, and cut the tongue until it reaches the canal, but avoid the sinews of the bone if there is any cause from those.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the sebaceous gland as we have recommended; and it means on the section of the canal through the flaccidity that is from that eye which is from that which is disrupted and by the abscission of the mouth.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Let the wound be open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour comes in which such piercing is feared, add two flaps of the skin of the wound, and let it alone with that solely as the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh not decay until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And as Albucasis says that the summary of this speech we have recommended is an explanation that when such pus from those abscesses has filled the entire body of the patient, and the patient has died, and his mouth has been opened, and they insert a sharp instrument through his throat so that he can breathe over the area of the wound for some time, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that commander, let the wound be open until the evil of the patient is consumed; and that evil lasts for three days; and therefore, for that commander, thus the wound, and cure it within that it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant holds a knife and inserts it into the patient's chest, and that part of the lung tissue, and it was called a puncture for its treatment, and it relieved the pain as if it were the groaning of the dying, and it uncovered the plague and relieved the pain which was caused by the plague.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, it was confessed that there had been no incision of vein or bloodletting, and the wind was from the plague, and it was cured within that time when it healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And it did not happen to the servant unless she was bitten in the neck, and then return to her own dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now I say that in the section of the appendix there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the incision above the abscess that occurs in the groin, and it is called a hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called hernia of the groin is an abscess of the second color of the body, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And there are two types of pain, either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	In the natural type, there is no cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	In the accidental type, one is similar to gouty nodes, and the other type is similar to abscesses caused by artery blockage, which is feared.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	Do not make assumptions about it like iron, but only in the case of a small one.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine that one and compare it to the other, and if it resembles gouty nodes and is not suspended from any of the veins, then you should incise it like the nodes, and extract what contains the pus and bursa; otherwise, you should examine its entire condition and apply a remedy with something that is known to cure before it heals.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section of the types of gout.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the types of gout, I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is difficult to distinguish between a node and an opening with such uncertainty.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So you say that an opening is heat and fever and severe pain until the boiling of the superfluity ceases; and it is a putrid condition that now stops the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	However, a node is not heat, fever, or pain, and it contains the cipher of Leo which is in the abdomen.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And if the color of the body is second, and its beginning is like a cyst and is made thus, whether larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, that one is fatty and contains moisture, and the colors of moisture are mottled, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So, when you reach the cure of a node, extract that and inquire about that which is at the beginning of the instrument called the introducer, according to its form, which is approaching this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is a matter of inquiry about abscesses and all nodes, that you take this instrument and introduce it into the wettest place that you find in the abscess, and you rotate its tips little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the flesh.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then approach the last measurement of the abscess's size, and extract the pus and consider what is left in its footprints.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current moisture, of whatever color, is forgotten, then you insert it with a dry, superficial section as I have mentioned in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture from the footprints of the pus, then you know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry on it with a section in the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have been taught, suspend that with an ointment, and excoriate the cord of all parts to facilitate it, and keep the bandage or bag, if possible, on that and extract that pus from its root.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it cannot be extracted, and wounds may occur due to that, and then you extract it before any cause from there.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	But if it is broken by any cause, too much or too little, the root returns according to the most.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some small part of it is missing, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound, strengthen the bandage, and place a poultice on the affected area, and cure the other from the other treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large wound, then cut both sides of it and cure that one with that which contains it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the pulsatilla is present at that place, or not, then cover and fill the wound with three parts of tartar and leave it for two days or three until the wound begins to heal and the inflammation subsides; then return to incise that which remains of the wound.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for incision and puncture.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those that are the forms of the instruments, and of three kinds, which are large, and of them some are wide, and of them some are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of a large probe is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of introducing the instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of introducing the small instrument is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Made of iron, of silver, of well-rounded ends, in order that the instrument may be inserted into the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experiencers, and they are named the albed, and one of them is called the berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three species, of which one is large, the middle one, and the small one.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experiencer, shape of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the middle experiencer, shape of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experiencer, shape of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is convenient for those abscesses and wounds and fistulas and boils that enter among them, as they are of the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And there are needles, large, lions, as with great needles that are used to sew the wounds, and they are made of bronze, or of iron, or of silver, and the best are when they are made of bronze.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the black plum is made into experiments, which are said to have been opened for those who had fistulas in the cavity of which they were reflected, which were reflected by their levity at those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three types, one of which is long and thin, and the other is short and thick, according to the size of the fistula and its stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The large plum experiment form:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The thin plum experiment form:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The small plum experiment form:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the needles are of special types, one of which is simple, and has only one curve, and there are three types: large, medium, and thin.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And there are also curved needles, and there are three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those, some have two curves, and there are three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those, some have three curves, and there are three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a single great nail, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a single medium-sized nail:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a single small nail, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a large golden nail:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of a medium-sized golden nail, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small golden nail, shape of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large nail with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a medium-sized nail with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a small nail with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a large nail with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a medium-sized nail with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a small nail with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the shapes of the sharp and pointed scalpels that cut and lance boils and abscesses, and they come in three kinds, namely large, medium-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of a medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The edges of those that are cut are sharp and the other edges are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a way, but so that it is done well in the excision of the nodes, to avoid tearing the beginning of a vein or nerve, and for those it heals the patient and brings tranquility through a small incision, which is due to the excision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of needles, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as shown in the images.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large needle:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of the medium needle:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of the small needle:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of iron and are similar to a needle, which is made of silver.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the edge where the puncture is made that the space is hidden and in that corner at the parts of the intestine and the abdomen, when you want, as shown in the images.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the aforementioned ones for the puncture of abscesses and do not perforate the patients, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of wounds from which blood is removed, and there are three kinds; large, medium, and small; the forms of them:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	are round shapes, somewhat circular, and some length, and they are thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you must know that these kinds of wounds are large, medium, and small, because for those from which blood is removed at great speed in urgent cases, and when you first see them, there is no medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, you should not use these to remove blood from all parts of the body, and only use them in fleshy places, such as on the ribs of the chest and thighs, and on the ribs of the arms, and breasts, and belly, and groins, and similar to those of fleshy ribs.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some veins are made of other small instruments similar to those of fish, according to this form; through which blood is removed when it is done by flebotomy, or you must begin from a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some wounds are made round in this way:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	About the care of men's nipples, which are similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some wounds are inflated to make men's nipples similar to women's, and then they inflate the nipples, and they assemble them with women's nipples, and they are distant.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to the one who has that, cut those parts with a sharp blade according to this shape, from line B to line G, and then excoriate the whole scab, and place the flesh medicament on the wound, and adjust the two lips of the wound together, and cure it before it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the nipple declines to the parts below and is softened by its size as it is with women, then cut it in two at the base, and make two sections similar to the lunar shape, each of which contains the other at the end of each, so that the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line B and the line G. And then excoriate the scab that is between the two lips of the wound, remove the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary in the cure before it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the initial treatment of that which enters due to the patient's discomfort and due to blood flow, then cover the wound with a plaque submerged in corrosive liquid and leave that inside where it will eat away at the gray matter, and cure that which is inside that.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	About the puncturing of abscesses that come from the glans.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from the glans are of the species of scrofula, which contain a pus pouch.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those, some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be punctured with a lunar crescent-shaped section according to this figure: from the line .G to the line .B. And as soon as all that is inside the abscess is evacuated, then complete it with new skin and leave it until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And as soon as the skin has healed and has been treated with an appropriate liquid, it will be cured.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the neck glands or scrofulous nodes is present, then you should lance it as we described in the section on scrofulous nodes equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague is extended to an area that cannot be reached by cauterization, then administer it as we described in the section on that.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Section on the section of abscesses that occur by fistula or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the fistula is broken, and the cord that is above it is consolidated, then abscesses and signs such as inflammation and abscess are known to occur through the artery or vein: because when the abscess is by fistula, it is longer attached to the front of the body; and that when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a crackling sound.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And the one that is by vein is located at the front of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And section on this abscess is wrong, and especially in those that are after the ribs, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is a great wound, therefore cover that its cure should be avoided, and those that are on the outside, or on the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	When over the part that belongs to them due to inflammation of the orifice of the arch, cut through the dry section in length; and then remove the section with tweezers, and remove the arch, and remove the tunics that are inside to be discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place the needle on that side and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the arch with a double force in two places, — which causes you to have seen in extraction of two arches that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then push the place between two ribs with a space inside that is enough to be in it, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in the place where pus is generated before the ribs fall; and cure that with a suitable remedy to that before it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is due to section of a vein, then cover that you have your hand on the place where the abscess is, and introduce the needle behind the place where you have had your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that place double before you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess with a thread according to what I have told you in the rib of a grape of two parts of two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that the thread might come out, then introduce the thin thread into the abscess at the beginning of the needle, and strengthen the four threads in different places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess at the middle part of the patient before it is filled with that which is inside, and insert the excess of the thread, and leave what is left behind.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand over the powder that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and then administer the cure which is made from cloves and garlic before it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, when abscesses occur in the arteries and veins, and similarly, abscesses occur in nerves when they occur due to their compression or excessive work, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made in the place of the assistants or the tailor, or in any place where the joints are painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And if the abscess is large, and resembles the color of the other body, and is in the upper part of it, and when stretched quickly, feels like a great shock to the patient.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And if the abscess is not attached to the front of the body, and therefore it is left to its own devices, and it is maggot-infested throughout and does not go to the wound or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be punctured with iron, because it often causes contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But those that are on the head or on the forehead should be pricked with a needle.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if the abscess is small, then use a pair of forceps and cut off that part.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with an onion, scrape that part, and remove it; and place the bandage over the wound, and cure it before it becomes healthy.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section of the abscess that occurs in the mouth and occurs in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	When many men have moles in their abdomens and other parts of the body, which are called fungal because of their similarity to mushrooms, with a subtle head and a large body; and their labia are also converted, and they are from those that are small, and they are from those that are very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in his abdomen there were two parts that were more like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, of smaller size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And their labia were inverted and they bled, and moisture ran from that time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I inserted those and again in the one foot twenty-one inches deep, and the other six inches deep.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in their insertion is that you consider whether the patient is humid, and the color of the skin is white, moist, of subtle size; then you insert it with a spatula, and keep it in your presence, cauterizing it in the fire, because many warts are expelled from its section, which is very sanguineous; and if you find the blood, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient is purging and afraid, take care not to use iron; instead, take a recent plaster, strengthen that hand, which we have mentioned; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust in the stricture of the plaster strip; therefore, do not stop strengthening the large, dirty plaster on the hand until it is removed and falls off by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the hand is of large size, there may be some cause of fear and terror, especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you incise the hand of the patient, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then care for that until it is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to incise the hand that is of dark color, with little sensation, and regularly regrown, for that is cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And when you come to the memory of cranes, stop.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the cure of a high fever at the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	High fever at the navel is caused by various causes; or by a fissure in the navel, which is on the abdomen, and the cloth or intestine follows according to what happens in the other ruptures; or by a scar that flows with blood or with an artery according to what is called this, or by constricted breathing in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is by a fissure in the navel and the protrusion of the cloth, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is a lion's pain, and it appears in different positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is by the protrusion of the intestine, then its position is similar to that which we have mentioned, with greater diversity, and as you press that, the aforesaid symptoms are concealed, and then return; and very often it is like that, and it is a great miracle that it should be introduced into the bath and with great labor.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, then it is not hidden when you press your hand on it, nor is it constrained or crushed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to dryness, then these signs appear on the abscess, which are declining in appearance.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is due to flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large and hard, and forms after a certain amount of time.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to tenderness, then the touch of it is soft.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider whether the prominence of the umbilicus is due to dryness of the sinew, or of the vein, or of tenderness; therefore it should be prohibited from treatment, because in those cases there is fear and fear as you were taught in the chapter where he said about abscesses due to dryness of the sinew and of the vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the umbilicus is due to the intestine or the hernia, then you should command the patient to hold their own side and be extended; and then you should examine the entire circumference of the umbilicus, and command it to be facing towards between your hands on the side, and then circle the span lat around the circumference of the umbilicus over the area where you have properly examined the tent; and then extend the membrane of the abscess to the parts above the inch great; and then tie in the circumference with a strong or weak thread and the manner of the ligature.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then approach the abscess with a needle extended over the skin and introduce the said needle into that indication and try to puncture the intestine; and if you have not done so before or do not do so through the skin, then you extract the pus and push the intestine to the parts inside the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the sac, then take that lancet and scrape off its excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is against your incision or vein, then circle that point, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two fields strongly and introduce two needles into the circuit that you made around the abscess in the manner of crochet, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and let the place where the flesh extends and falls down; or scrape off that which is subtle and can be removed, and then care for that which covers the mucus inside which it should be healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the prominence of the navel is made of flesh and no infection or moisture is present, then cover the wound as we have said and drain the pus or moisture from it, which causes the infection, and then cure that wound with a suitable remedy that covers and heals it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 43.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of the knee.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, of the special case of the knee and how to treat it with medicine, and that it is important to avoid ulceration in it; and we have said that the knee generates in the most and careful treatment of its cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancients said that some knee gangrene is in a location where it can be eradicated, such as a knee that is on the breast or on the cushion and similar to the members allocated to stretch all of that, and more so when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and serious, do not cover it with yourself, because one cannot heal from that or I have not seen another, nor that it has reached that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in them is as we have said, that you precede by descending and lifting the patient and purging them of black bile for some time, and then sign it if you find a clear recurrence.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation, and prohibit any movement in those parts; and then explore every part of the body thoroughly without causing any reason for their complaint.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the wound bleed, and do not open it again, and express the affected parts, and cleanse the wound thoroughly with your hand or with an instrument that is as clean as possible from the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you find that the wound is bleeding profusely from an artery or vein, then cauterize it as soon as the flow of blood stops, and then care for it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 4
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure of hydrophobia.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the division, of the species of hydropsy of water, and the symptoms of each species, of its cure with our medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is not just the species of althitas alone, and it is not approximated to iron for the species of temporalists or the species of hyposarca, because that is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this species of hydropsy temporalist with your medicines and do not combine your treatment, then consider, because if the patient has already been weakened, or is another patient with another hydropsy, such as in the lungs or stomach and similar to those, then be careful not to treat it with iron, because there is fear of that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient of great virtue, and it is not another disease but hydropsy only, and not in children or the elderly, then the method of the operation for it is that you raise the patient between your hands, and give it the exact position of its abdomen with your hand, pushing the water to the part behind the pentenilh, and then take a sponge according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Should be of two sharp parts long, from the sharp extremity with space; but moreover should be in some brevity short by short, so that in the operation you do not pass into the intestine, and that it does not lead you.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider whether the generation of hydrocele is due to the intestines, as it is customarily believed that you should make the section along the belly for the amount of three digits below, in the right side of it over the peritoneum.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydrocele is due to a disease of the intestine, then your section should be on the left side of the belly for three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to a disease of the liver, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not make your section over the side on which you wish to place the patient so that the excess fluid does not flow to that place foul.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then perforate the entire cord with that instrument, and enter into that section, and lift your hand between the cord and the spine, and you excise it; and if the quantity of one finger or about.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the skin until it reaches the space where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or of thin iron, with which at the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on both sides of it there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and it is shaped at the end like a quill, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of it there is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, then the cotton on the instrument should be pulled out, and then the water is evacuated in small quantities, because if you evacuate too much water at once, it will cause great harm to the patient due to the resolution of his spirit animal, or an accident may occur.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	And then evacuate the water according to the quantity of the medicine and according to what means to you the patient's dispositions of the virtue of his leg and of his goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Approach and extract the instrument, and retrieve the water that causes this, which is usually held back by the cord that you remove the one that is over the cipher of which and recommend to you that you pierce that second in that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Approach and repeat the instrument on the other side if the patient tolerates this, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days, and guard yourself from error until not too much water is lost.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	However, if you are afraid of the patient and leave a large quantity of water, then cure that one with burial in sand tail, and moisture in bath, and under the sun for a long time; and cure that one with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the melsa and the finger close to the extraction of water, according to what I have said before.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the cure of children who are born without pierced urinary tracts.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some children are born from the womb of their mother with the head of their umbilical cord not pierced (or twisted straight or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, cut the umbilical cord as soon as it is born with a very thin blade according to this form.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And place a thin nail with a flat head on the twisted part and tie it for three days or four times a day.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they want to urinate, remove it; and then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not place the flat head, the urine that passes over the wound may not clean this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	The one who has the twisted part should be treated with a flat nail, as we have said, for three days until it is straightened out.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Those in whom the twisted part is not in its place, the cause of which is that those who are born with the head of the umbilical cord in the wrong position cannot urinate at the proper times, until they raise the umbilical cord to their chest; and it is not at conception, because then the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and this is a malformation caused by lack of strength.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation is that the patient should lie on their back, and then extend the head of the knife towards your left hand with great forceful extraction, and insert the tip of the knife into the place of the pericardium at a sharp angle, as if inscribing with a pen, or not cutting any part, so that the edge of the knife resembles the tip of the knife and that the blood flows into the second place after the operation.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation of flushing, four things may happen; and pause at that moment when you are cutting the vein, and cure the wound before it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 66.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the white matter that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the knife and in the foreskin and black and adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the knife.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Four things happen to this white matter in the knife and its sharpness and the flesh of the meat.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, cover it with a thin oil and cut into that which the entire body of the monks; and place your hand over that which is submerged in Egyptian ointment; and apply that, cure the wound with the oil inside that it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the tumor is malignant, of red color, then cover it with what you administer cautery at the beginning and end of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the tumor is on the prepuce of the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the tumor is in the prepuce and the other part is deformed, then cover it with what you remove which is inside the prepuce before it consolidates; and now cure that deformity, because when you cure it along with the prepuce, it is not ensured that it will not be three.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And already, accidents have occurred in the genitals and in the black and curly prepuce, then cover it with what you conquer all that which is already blackened and which is voluntarily corrupted or which is already corrupted; and apply lines on top of that with this ointment, which is beaten with flour of millet and of thistle and crushed.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then care for the other wound until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	However, if there is excessive blood flow, then administer the following cautery in this way:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	where the helpful cautery is placed at two positions apart, near the wound and on the surface when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corrupted and is destroyed completely at once, then place a urinary catheter in the opening of the foreskin to allow the patient to urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur unless the foreskin is known, and it is not required to be circumcised; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess), then excise the blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove those extremely, then excise the spatula from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and then carefully insert a thin needle through the foreskin, which is very thin and easily perforated by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then gently separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a delicate instrument, which is already soaked in water to prevent other germs from adhering.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then apply a styptic to stop the bleeding until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the cleaning of children and the treatment of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution of continuity as with other plagues: rather, it is our operation and our will, and it is properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to that better operation and via the least painful way to save them from harm.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, we say that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of the free times, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experience that the cause is that I have atrobat the greater part of the artisans and barbers to use circumcision and cleaning with a knife and with a spoon; and they use a bandage and a finger.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already tried all these methods and none of them has shown better improvement than the use of forceps, or a thread that can be used like a nail, which can escape the sutures from above, where the foreskin is attached to two tunics, and the tonics are placed behind, and often it is necessary to have another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the method of healing that is done for cauterization and digital, which is used by surgeons, is not secure at the incision of the member's extremity, as it often enters into its wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation, a nail is used, which can cause harm and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and it has been stretched in such a way that it does not require any suture, and I have seen such cases.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More than the suture that is done with forceps and a thread that can be used like a nail, the goodness, as I have discovered to myself, is because the forceps have a proportional incision, for which reason the sharpness that is above is equal to the sharpness that is below; and so when you place your hand according to two sharpnesses in one time, and the incision is made at once; and it is done by compression of the nail according to a figure containing the foreskin of the penis in all parts, which does not make any mistake at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first step of the operation is that you make the child comfortable, especially if it is one of those who understands a little, and do not make him move more than necessary, and let him lie on his back until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then try to make him as comfortable as possible in that position where he receives his understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make him as comfortable as possible in that position where he is prepared to hold his hands; and do not let him see the forceps; hide them in your hand or behind his back, so that the child does not see those or any other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on his back and blow into the crown of his head, and pull out the one that is sticking out from under his back, and modify that which is added to it from deafness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then place the signified location on the back of the child, and apply a small bandage below that one, and then tie the first ligature, and then tear off the second layer and put it on the location of the ligature, and insert it between two layers.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Approach the patient's neck gently and remove the cap of the cup; then slowly and gradually, which is better; place powder above and on the powder, place cloth in which is spread mugwort of gout in a solution of rose oil recently boiled; and lay that over the other side; and cure that with the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for extraction, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The one side of the forceps should not be sharp and the other side should be sharp, so that it does not damage the nail, and the length of the two blades should be equal to the length of two thumbs.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in extraction is that it often escapes the entire or part of the internal neck, or it should be started from the beginning.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, cover that of your hour with your finger at the abscess of the place and that you insert it second equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a needle and insert it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If they have passed three days, and that swelling which is behind the malleolus has become inflamed, then you should let that swelling come out cautiously, excoriate it with facilitation, and incise the second one that you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the malleolus, so that it does not come out to that swelling.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then cure that wound with those powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised from the tendon above measure, and observes the parts below, then that does not come out to that swelling.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that wound which we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stone or congealed matter, or by sand or flesh, and similarly to those we have said about the methods of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and you see retention of it due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then ask the patient to lie on their back.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the feet of that person on their own back and extend their belly from the part below their back, and the patient should tighten their abdomen as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is pressed to expel the stone from the parts behind, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if that liquid is not dissolved and you see that it is very hot, then apply the remedy above the patient, so that you administer extraction of it with an instrument called a siringua, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and sharp like a lion's claw, with a thin pen needle at its end, similar to a palm leaf and a sickle, to which a thin needle should be attached at the top.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way to collect the urine from that person is to bend and tie the end of the needle in the exit of the urine with wool or cotton for good adhesion; and insert the ends of the needle into the part behind the siringua, and if there are any superfluous causes of the wool, do not introduce it into the needle, but into the canula with force. Then absorb the siringua in the border and in the album of honey.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And massage the patient on the bed, and apply a wet cloth to their forehead and back, and rub with olive oil and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And introduce the catheter to facilitate its passage until it reaches the area of the back; and then bend the catheter over the abdomen; and then push the catheter through that; and then push it through until it reaches the bladder, and that is how the patient should be positioned so that the cause of the problem can be found, and not done in any other order, but in the way that it goes to the correct position.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the thread slowly, as the urine soaks the thread.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then remove that and do for the cure of urine, and use a catheter, do not stop doing that and use a catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient is again relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 99.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	About the quality of bladder catheterization with the clamp and similar instruments that are suitable for that.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or it is congealed in that place, or it is constricted by a peduncle, and you want to drain fluids and medications from there, then use the instrument called the cystoscope, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but it has a narrow opening, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that place there are three parts: two on one side, and sometimes.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning is a cavity where that which is injected is placed, and it should be as much as that which is inserted, so that when any cause draws out the humors from there, it should be drawn out, and when it is expelled, the liquid should be drawn out, and when it is expelled long, then the instrument should be cleaned with naphtha in the battles of war.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to draw out humors from the bladder, insert the end of the cystoscope into the liquid, and draw out that liquid which is injected into the parts above, so that the liquid is drawn into the cavity of the cystoscope.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then introduce the catheter into the urethra as we recommended in the circumcision; and then apply moisture with that water, which moistens the bladder at first, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the catheter that is used to irrigate the bladder, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or tin, of which the tip is similar to a small feather, and then the shaft is inserted into the urethra.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder and place it in the water that you want to irrigate the bladder with, and then tie it tightly with a strong double knot, and then boil the water over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then introduce the tip of the catheter into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand on the bladder with the water as it begins to enter the patient's body.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not see the bladder, then take a glass and make a circle from it; and then perforate it completely; and then introduce a strong rod through those openings, as if it were rolled up; and then add the circle where it was attached, so that you can place it in the water that you want to use for irrigation, and smell and taste it.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you bring that instrument to him and do it as you did with the bladder, and express the moisture from the bladder into your hand.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of a stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones that form in the kidneys and stones that form in the bladder, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical operation and incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone that forms in the bladder itself is the one that gets stuck in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will describe it briefly and clearly.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, stones that form in the bladder mostly occur in children; and among the symptoms of this are that the urine that is excreted from the bladder resembles water in its thinness, and appears in the sand; and the patient feels pain in the lower abdomen, and it is treated with oils.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is the healing of children who have reached fourteen years of age; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In young people, it is caused by something that occurs between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is rare, it is opposite to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we reach the cure of that, cover the beginning of that which they call cristeri, which removes all the fissure that is in their intestines; because that fissure sometimes prevents the formation of the stone through investigation of it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then press the intestine against their feet and hold it tight and strong so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it jumps out from some other place.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that cushion between your hands prepared, and the hands of it are placed under the patient, so that the bladder is entirely made to lean down towards the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then approach that one and all of that one.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the stone in the abdomen, then immediately perform a section on it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not catheterize the entire bladder, then apply oil to the bladder's left side, if the patient is a child, or the right side if they are an adult, and insert that into their rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And approach the stone while it remains behind the bladder.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And slowly bring that into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that against the bladder's left side, and expel that to the parts of the abdomen where the section was made.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press the bladder against his hand; and command another assistant to extend his right hand over the parts above, and his left hand to remain on the edge of the abdomen, which is behind the thighs, in the part where the section was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a thin, sharp instrument of this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And divide it in that place between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle, but towards the left side of the cushion; and let the incision be made on the stone, which is in the buttock, and make a transverse section, so that the incision will be wide enough and narrow according to the quantity that the stone occupies in that place, and not too much, because it is difficult to remove the stone which is in the buttock, and it has its disadvantages.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you should know that there is a stone with sharp edges and margins, for which the extraction of it is difficult by that.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And that one is like a lion's claw, and it is round, and it is made of that material for easier extraction.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is that one with sharp edges and margins, adjust it in the incision.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if there is not such a disadvantage, then forcefully push it over that, or gently pull it out with a handle of a tool that is similar to a knife, which does not slip from it; or insert it next to the tool with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do it on that one, then slightly widen the incision a little, and if you want to draw out pus, cut strongly through that with vitriol-triad.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you push the hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then incise around it; and then push a little more of that; and similarly do if they are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, it is customarily said that you incise that with a great section, which causes the patient one of two causes: either death or because of the continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not completely solidified.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	If you administer the expulsion of it before it is forgotten, or if you induce it through the fracture with the forceps before it is extracted in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ointments of aloe and of dragon's blood, and strongly that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place that cloth soaked in oil or oiled and wet with water, to prevent the abscess from bursting.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then gently lay the patient on their side, and do not let the bandage come off until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when those wounds have come off, rub the area with water and oil, and care for that abscess until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if an abscess occurs in the same place, it is adhesive and corrosive, and if it is similar to when the wound is in the bladder frozen, and for that reason the urine is prohibited (and that is known as the exit of the wound with urine), then enter the said wound and extract that wound, because it can cause the bladder to rot and decay.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and apply ointment to all of it, and use what is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover all the hours of the entire treatment that you have placed on the cushions and adjust the medicines that are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the bladder, and it is fixed there, and urine cannot be passed, then cure that with this remedy that I will recommend so that you reach separation, because too many troops are said to be used for this treatment; and already I have extracted it, and it is that you take a piercer of iron, of which this is the form of it:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extraction, sharp, fixed in wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take lithotomy forceps, and place that bladder under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the bladder, perforating until the piercer reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then rotate the piercer with your hand in that small stone little by little, and you perforate the hole of it until you make that of the other part penetrate; because urine is already released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then place your hand on that area where the stone is lodged in the urethra, which is urinated out, and the patient is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	However, if this cure is not possible for some reason that prevents you from doing so, then place two faithful men on either side of the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then carefully cut into the stone in that urethra between two blades.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then remove the surrounding tissue and modify the wound with a poultice made in the following way:
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to place faithful men near the stone, but rather to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other layer above should not be removed, for when the faithful man removes the tissue of the stone, the egrecian returns to its place and takes on the poultice.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that, when you have removed the faithful man above, you must lift the egrecian to the parts above, or return it to its complement and take on the poultice as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of kidney stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Kidney stones in women are rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	However, if one of those has a kidney stone, its treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden to use force.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The first method is for the woman to lie on her back.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second method is to find a woman who knows how to disrobe when the surgeon is casting, or to have one of the women who are having menstruation.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third method is to find a woman who knows this art, mainly the operation is done by the surgeon himself.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth method is that the incision location over the kidney stone in women is longer than the location of the stone, so it is necessary to make an incision, and in that there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	However, if you need to do so, then it is necessary to find a wise woman who knows how to treat it.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	However, if you are not allowed to do so, then find a smart and subtle woman, or present a wise woman who has experience in the matter of women, or a woman who has never left this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then do that presently, and command the patient to do everything you tell them from the examination of the stone until the beginning; this is because it is necessary to check if the woman is a virgin, then cover her with a cloth and insert the stone into her anus.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If that happens, cut that off from there and then command the patient to scratch over it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert the stone into the patient's vagina and examine the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and feel around there well.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	If that happens, then cover the patient's vagina with a cloth and gradually insert it into the opening of the bladder towards the parts behind the base of her virtue until it reaches the place where the cloth is.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then scratch over that position of the patient's vagina at the place where the cloth is located and insert the stone into that part, and do not remove the stone from there until it is completely inserted.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; and then place the ray on that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity you know the stone is located in.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	You should know that the types of stones are varied: some of them are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have projections.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know how many types there are of that stone for what you mean by that stone.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to draw out the sand, place the three-pronged spoon in that location and hold it there for an hour until the sand is removed, and then return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure to prepare the tools that are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you will be helped by those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to draw out the sand and know that the expulsion of the sand is from the arch that is incised, then place powder on that location and loosen those tools and structure, and do not repeat that; leave the stone and do not remove it, for if you do, the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the pain.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Since the intensity of the wound decreases over time, and the wound becomes better, then return to your operation before the stone is completely forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision for hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is not other than an accumulation of moisture in the white cord which contains the gut, and it is called a hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some veins are in the proper pancreas which nature has prepared in the part of the gut, before it becomes another gut; and this is the cord of the gut between the white cord which we have said, and it is not that but a scar.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to the weakening of the gut, because that happens to the gut, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow caused by an impact on the gut.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has various colors, such as the color of it is declining to yellow or to blood, or red, or black, or white, or watery, and that is what is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the symptoms by which one can recognize this aggregation of pus: if it is in the white phage, which we have called, then the abscess gradually declines in length, like the shape of a bird, and appears at the genitals, because the moisture comes from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the patient's own flesh, then the abscess gradually declines from the shape of a bird, and it is estimated by some to be another bird.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the folds of the genitals and the white phage, then it is often hidden.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you extract the color of the moisture from the abscess and compare it with the color of the bird's foot, which precedes its form; and if that color is found in the bird's footprints, then judge that it is from that bird.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when it comes to the cure of this disease, then command the patient that they be bled if possible, and sometimes examine the wound.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then place him supine on his back for some reason, and place something under his neck.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then place yourself on the left side of him, and command the assistant to follow on his right, who extends his hand to about one span from the coccyx to the division of the buttocks.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a wide spatula and cut the coccyx from the inside to the length within the perineum.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And then make the incision straight and equally distant from the line that should be on the buttocks, until it reaches the white knee cap.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And then scrape that, and observe, and be careful not to incise that; and your scraping should be the same as that which is suspended above and subtly scratched according to the amount possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then perforate the knee completely with water, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between two lips of the incision with one finger, and extend the knee to the parts above; do not touch the coccyx that is included, and incise the knee in that way that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And insert that into its entirety or in parts, and especially its subtle left side, because if you do not carefully examine the insertion of it, it is not certain that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the wound process of that part of the skin has been removed in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the cipher, return and adjust the two lips of the skin of the genitals with a sutura, and cure that as with the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if the wound is corrupted by another disease, then cover it with the veins that are above the suspensory, and remove the wound, and cure that as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is added in two parts evenly, then you know that those are the hernias; so insert that part second that you have made in the other equally; and if it is to your sight that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you should clean the wound, and insert into the incisions wool submerged in oil or rose-scented oil; and place another piece of wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and spread it over two genets and the navel of the belly; and cover those with folded cloths and powders, and tie them with a strip of linen that is second to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then take two pieces of cloth and their folds of wool carminated according to this similarity; and make them into the shape of the parts that are pressed from the side or from wet wool, and add them to the structure in the belt of the trousers, and the first one takes hold of the buttocks entering through the back, and the second one takes hold of the part of the underwear, and two extremities on two cushions and two other extremities on two ankles, and all the structure should be adjusted in the belt of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And some wedges are used to medicate this hernia artificially with a pointed cautery instead of a cut in the section; and it is that you take a fine pointed cautery and insert it into the crease of the thighs, and ignite it after we have recommended that it be covered before it is discovered that the white cipher contains water, and then you take a cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	e it resembles Greek lettering
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then puncture that abscess, and ignite it so that all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the abscess with fingers, and lance it with fingers, and lance it with a fine cautery burning; and scrape out that second one as much as possible until you remove all of it; and guard yourself from the heat so that it does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting than other operations.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you find that the abscess is in conflict with the operation at the time of incision or at the time of cauterization, or if there is a flow of blood, then cover it and cure the contradiction that it causes for you, according to the treatment that is appropriate.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is unwilling, and does not want the second operation because of its horror, then administer puncture according to what I have recommended; and when you are certain about it, because of what we have said about the meanings, that that hernia is painful.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then carefully lift the patient over a raised cushion, and then make an incision in the lowest part of their abdomen, parallel to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And the incision should be wide enough for all the water to flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the incision and hold it there, so that the water flows out continuously.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for them until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is resistance in the flow of water at that time, you should not make the incision: because if the white cloth in the orifices of the wound causes resistance and prevents the flow of water, then place a pen or instrument in the wound from which water can be extracted from the hydrips, the shape of which is preceded; or adjust a small tube in the pressure of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you should know that the water returns, and is collected in vessels or jars; and as it is collected, then make an incision according to the same method, so that the patient can pass their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On incision over fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You should know that in incision over this hernia, there is great danger of perforation into the major organs; therefore, I see it best to remove it and save the patient.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation in that case and the characteristics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, say that abscesses do not occur in those parts where the muscles are attached and it is done for various reasons: either due to excessive sharp aggravation, which is found in the muscles, or due to impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And its color is according to the color of the part, and it is not dark in pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And often it is a calcified abscess, of which the color is dark, and it does not cause pain.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some wounds are made by the narrowing of the arteries, and by inflammation of those which already exist, or by inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	May that which is caused by the inflammation of the archils be known as the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it at that place; and not that touch.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	May that which is made due to the inflammation of the vein not be dispersed from it by any cause of compression at that place.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species and on the other flesh; and you insert the codena of the genetius, and bring the hook to the parts above, and extract that from the white cipher, and remove the suspensors of the vessels, and tie them, and insert the suspensors as you remove all of the part of the parts of the hook.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the hook has already been attached to those flesh, then you should remove the hook and insert that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is any adherence due to the white cipher, or between what is between the veins, then you should remove all of that adherence and insert that at the beginning round.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the birth of flesh is at the location of adhesion, which is behind, then cover that area completely with what is there, and extract the pus as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is completed, fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose oil and vinegar; and then care for that wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the cure of hernia that is in the thigh.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The thigh is an abscess enveloped by some envelope similar to a bursa, and it is difficult to perform exercise and ambulation on the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, fear for that which precedes it is remembered.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However cover what they say operation in that second which they did first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that cover what you do is to place the patient on an elevated stool; and then raise the suspensory ligaments of the testicles to the parts behind; and then take the cord of the genitals, and tie it with the knots that are said to be at the base, which are exposed to the view; and hold those other ministers who you have, and extend them with great force.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then approach the space between the ribs with a sharp cutting instrument to expose the veins that are inside.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then remove all parts that we have mentioned in the extraction of arsenic, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert a needle that is sharp on both sides, and insert the first one in the first of the places where we have cut, and the other one at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then approach those places with a straight cutting instrument along the length of the body, and extract what has been added from the putrefying and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then care for the wound with the cure of the other wounds in which you want to be born healthy because they do not block the veins that come from one or two generations, as it is not bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you have cut through all the veins, cover them with testicles that are removed or that the testicles are crushed by those veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment from the beginning of the veins, and that they are covered, or that something is done so that it does not harm those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen, away from the angles of the stomach wall, causing intestines to protrude through that rupture.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either from the abdomen or from its excess, and these two species occur due to various causes: impact, strain, sudden movement, or lifting a heavy object, or similar actions.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The cause of this is that when it occurs due to abdominal extension, it happens gradually over time and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess that enters the body when the abdomen presses on the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The cause of this is when it occurs due to abdominal section, where at the beginning pain becomes very intense suddenly; and it is an abscess that appears differently after the initial apparent symptoms, and it is caused by the intestine, and the condition of the hernia is related to the parts of the abdomen.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine is wrapped around the hernia, and this is called an enterocele.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes the intestine is wrapped around the hernia due to pressure, and sometimes it enters the intestinal fissure, which is then held in place, and this is a great danger for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain and more so when pressure is applied.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this disease, iron is often used with fear, because it is believed that it should be avoided.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The method of the operation of this is that you command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity and follow your instructions as they return, and then place it on their back between your hands, and raise their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then place the string that is the string of the testicles above, and insert the string of the testicles completely through; and then fasten two pins in the section second when it is necessary to open the section with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section second, according to the quantity that you can possibly have from that, is already open.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then excoriate that skin which is located behind the coda of the testicles, until it is completely exposed from every part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you insert your finger into that place where the testicle is located, in that place between the white skin, which is behind the coda, and between the second skin, and remove that adhesion that is in the part behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then you moisten the coda of the testicles with the parts deformed, and extend the white skin on its left side, and raise the testicle to the part of the section; and command the assistant to extend it, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind the solution completed.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And then check if there is any cause for the intestine wrapped in the white skin.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause, then you remove it from the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle that is thick and made of iron, and insert it from the back of the scrotum, which is the sac containing the testicles, and cut into the skin; and then insert the ends of the needle, which extend four fingers, and place some sort of shape on them like a cross; and then apply ammonium to that part where we have said that the scrotum is located.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the needles with strong ammonium so that none of the veins that irrigate those can be touched, in order to prevent any cause for abscess from occurring here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then place another layer of strong ammonium along the first layer, about three fingers away from it; and then leave these two layers on the scrotum, which is located where we have said, and cut into the entire circumference, and remove it from there.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut into the part behind the scrotum, which runs from the back to the front, as we have recommended in that place where we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer submerged wool in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the bandage that we have recommended (and some white cloth is cauterized, which we have called the beginning of the wound, because it sometimes happens that those cloths are affected by flux of blood, which is why we recommend leaving them in place until they fall off on their own).
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the wound is late in healing, then apply a solution of water and vinegar, and place it on the wound until it falls off on its own.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the wound with the other method of healing until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of strangulated hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been seen that can be used for its cure with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that is alive; which is that you tie the vessels at the section above the wound; and then dry in the middle location around the abscess, until the vessels fall off.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the pain according to what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	About the dislocation that occurs in the elbows.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes a fracture occurs in the elbows, as we have said, and I will show you the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And there is no known cause for hernias in the groin; and if there is, it is rare; and it returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	However, if the time is prolonged, a fissure is made in the groin before the hernia appears; and this occurs because of the extension of the groin, which is as we have said, causing the groin to stretch, soften, and become inflamed.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with a pointed cautery as we have previously described.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and you press the area of the inflammation with a cutting motion according to the size of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then pull out the white ligament that is inside the knee, which should be exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the rod and place it over the prominent part of the ligament, and press that on the front of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then cover the two prominent parts of the rod's end with the ligament, and adjust one suture of those on the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then remove the end of the rod, and do not insert the ligament completely, nor extend the bowel, nor any other cause that you know about in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you insert the fields, clean that and restore the wound within where it is consolidated; because the ligament contracts and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, because it is more likely to be beneficial.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the ligament of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	When the neck of the testicles is swollen in some men, it is softened by applying heat because the flesh that is inside is softened, and the condition is treated accordingly.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is entrusted with the cure of the patient to have him lie on his side, and place the entire swelling over the natural neck; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened neck with three or four stitches and make a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then insert between the stitches; and cure by treatment of the other wounds until they are healed and the wounds close.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by reason it is allowed to me to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is that the doctor knows how to treat it when it occurs; and the other reason is that we have sometimes had the necessity of castration of other animals for our purposes, such as cows, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by attrition or by incision to section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case where it is done by attrition, the method of operation is to make the animal lie in water with its tail up, until its testicles are softened and hanging.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take those by your hand inside until they are resolved and do not appear outside the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In the case where castration is performed by incision and section, hold the animal and take the scrotum of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then lift the suspensory, and incise over each testicle with one cut through two testicles proceeding.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise those that are left after each excoriation.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave any of those on the cipherac with any cause, but the subtle cipherac which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better than the one performed by attrition, because attrition does not leave any cause of the testicles so that the animal desires gout.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And take care of the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of hernias.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hernias in men occur in two ways: one is where it appears in that space between the scrotum and the testicles, where there is a fold of skin.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some of them contain urine, which is in the scrotum of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a special type: and it is that the fold of skin over the pubic bone is similar to two testicles of a man, a little bit above the vaginal opening, where there is the penis of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: one from men and one from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you should insert those parts adjusted inside until the opening of that, and then treat those wounds with the treatment of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type of men, where there is urine in the scrotum of the testicles, there is no treatment or operation in that.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of lentils and meat that cause diseases in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Lentils are often adjusted according to natural causes until they become soft and are cooked properly; some women are magnified in certain ways within which it is spread as in men and through intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, you should have the excess of lentils on your hand or in an ounce and incised.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not incise too much, mainly at the beginning of the wound, so that it does not cause blood to flow out.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then care should be taken for the cure of the wound until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Meat that is not cooked in the cauldron of the mother until it fills that one, and often it is placed at the parts deformed according to its similarity to the meat (and for this reason, firstly they called this "bad stomach"); therefore, you should incise it as you would with lentils, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is not perforated, or is very small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is caused by previous disease, and that is made from meat not well adjusted or from thin or thick fibers.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made in the forehead of the woman, or in her ribs, or in the most sensitive part of her, or in the lowest part of her, and it prevents crying out and engaging in sexual intercourse and menstruation, and very strongly prevents menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made by regularly looking at the moon, if the obstruction is obvious, then proceed; but if it is not obvious, then you should look at it with your eyes or with a mirror.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is from thin fibers, and it is directed towards the two lips, then you should cover and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And place your hand on both of his lips, and then press them together with the fingers indicated for holding the nose.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, with her legs extended, and then extend both lips with force until the thin wire is broken and the obstruction is removed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and pour oil into it and place it on the area to prevent the wound from being consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the wire is thick and hard, then cut it with a sharp knife or a saw.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the obstruction is made of flesh, then suspend it with a hook and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And apply the remedies that stop bleeding from wounds without infection, such as honey, sulfur, and salt, adjusted to the size of the wound.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide-mouthed glass tube to prevent the pus from being consolidated again.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold that position for several days and administer some of that liquid.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then, apply the other treatment of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes certain events occur in the main native land of other creatures, and then it is necessary to follow this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	However, if it is for a cranial abscess, then do not make any incision into the cranial abscess in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the treatment of hemorrhages, tail, and red blotches that occur in the womb of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhages are appreciated from the openings of veins until blood flows continuously; and when these hemorrhages are stopped, they are thus.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	I have already mentioned in the division the types of these and their symptoms, and I will now say which receive treatment and which do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, say that hemorrhages and their stops when they are in the womb and do not appear to the senses, then in those cases there should not be made incision with a needle.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those that are in the major orifices of the body, upon which one feels pain, are those that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And if you place the finger in the most painful area and then extend it with a sharp instrument or cloth, and scrape those areas with the razor.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder those areas with one of the scraping powders, such as mustard and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then soak their feet in cold water for an hour, and then place that area in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the discharge from the wound persists, then make that area into a poultice with bread and scraps of millet, grains, and similar ingredients.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take ordinary flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultre with that mixture on the back of their hand.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the wound is suppurating, it is good; and if not, make it adhere with two bandages, and scarify the breasts with that.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and apply it to the affected area with coliandre or arnagloza or guarravier or vinegar, making it stick to the area; and then care for the area until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May I ask which one you have already mentioned in the second part that I said earlier?
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the perforation of a hernia accident in the great.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Special types of accidental abscesses in the great, such as carbuncle and lapident abscess and ulcers and adhubelat and erpetromens and fistulas emorroyas and raguarrias and thyl and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	I have already mentioned these diseases and the types of those and their symptoms, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And if you want to know in this treatise about abscess surgery which is done in the great when it comes to abscesses that collegeysso sania, and if you want to know how the operation of it is done with a knife.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain from the abscess in its beginning is sharp and caused by percussion, flexion, and fever, and if it swells and becomes hard over that sensation, then do not pierce it, but cure it with a remedy that helps with its maturation until the intensity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then consider whether you should apply a cushion on a bed that has two cushions; and lie on your back over it and adjust your feet to the part of the bed that is farthest from the belly, and expand your thighs, and place your hands under your head, and apply a suitable bandage to this wound.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow the left side and administer the instrument that is inserted into the major opening, the form of which will be found in those causes that will be mentioned.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And consider when you want to administer this instrument that you should place your hand on the opening of the major opening of the woman, and that what enters into the major opening should not be wider than the opening of the major opening and should not harm the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the tool is larger than the point of the main instrument, then you should place powder on the surface of the main instrument's point to prevent the tool from entering the main instrument's point.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should place the thread that is coming out of the tool above and let the assistant hold the tool and rotate the thread into the main instrument's opening.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the cauterization is ready, and it touches the hand and the lion and is wet, then you should remove that from the main instrument's head with a sponge.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then you should place a sponge soaked in rose oil or clear oil in which there is some stupidity; and place the cloth in the section of the main instrument's point.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And then clean the main instrument and place a cloth soaked in water in which there are some flowers on the penetential.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be cured after two days with the appropriate ointment that is suitable for that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Some wounds are washed with the largest and flattest cloth, which is crushed with water and honey, and then return to the wound, which is filled with lily or astrology longue water, and then return to the wound.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deeply embedded in the largest cloth, then you should not be prohibited from treating it with iron, having care for that which we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner the fetuses are best treated when they are not in a natural position.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife knows the natural position of the fetus by smell of it, and when you see the woman giving birth to the parts below and desiring to smell the air, and over that is removed by what is on her, and the head of the fetus is fastened on its own head, and the second part is hanging or suspended from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, make sure that the patient's belly is gently compressed so that the fetus does not move too much, as it may cause harm when raised above its head, and the second sign is called superfluity, which is beneficial for good delivery.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	If this is another part of the body that is not natural and not usable, because when the fetus is on its feet and the head of the patient is in front of the head of the fetus, and the hand of the patient is on the foot of the fetus, or the head of the fetus is on the hand of the patient, or the hand of the patient is on the belly of the fetus, and it is strongly turned over its own neck, and similar to the figures of the patient not usable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these causes, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And by showing all the figures of those, and what kind of engine is in them so that it can be understood for that and stand on that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fitting is done on the patient's head due to natural heat, and it is very painful for the woman, and the difficulty of that part is great, and sometimes the virtue of it has already been weakened, then do that procedure, or what the women had before, and evaporate the condensation from the patient with fenugreek oil and warm humidifying.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the menstrual pad between the patient's legs and tear that second skin, or dry it with a cloth until that water is removed from it.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly until the child is born.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not come out, then cover the woman with a mixture of honey and fenugreek oil.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command the woman, and the midwife, that she be calm and do that sucking with a condition; and give her mouth and nose for an hour, because the child is often born quickly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two mothers of the child are not born at the beginning, then gradually cover them with that facility small by small.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If the patient does not obey the instrument, then pause the foot on a chopping block and lift the feet off the ground, and then carefully place the chopping block on the ground; and the foot should be held so that it does not fall due to the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not intact and the flesh is dead, then insert those and remove the remaining flesh from the body or apply a bandage to the wound on the patient's chest and remove that equal part, which will be for the wound.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the umbilical cord on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the patient is lying on its feet, then cover those with you and gradually turn the patient into a smaller one, and then equalize that, and then take a foot of it and extend those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	If they are not inserted into the spaces, then command that patient to express itself, and make that external part conditioned, which will be for the wound if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if that is not possible, then gradually return the patient little by little until you reach the second natural figure, which will be possible at that time.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited to use all that we have recommended, then take some mallow and dissolved gum, and grind it well in the mortar for good percussion, and then apply this mixture to the lower part of the woman's belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that ointment in clear water until it reaches the desired consistency.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts placed on the patient are softened, then apply mithridate and rest it on that.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the subfumigation lasts for an hour, then apply it on a cloth, and then make that powder and extract the mouth of the patient, and lift it from there, and press the lowest part of the belly against the stomach with strong compression, which will relieve the pain.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The relief of the pain in its lower parts and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the pain is relieved in this manner, then gradually engage your fingers into her vagina; and place the woman's body on her back, and her feet downwards, and those be on the bed, and complete her hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then gently place your hand on their belly little by little, and gradually remove what is between their feet from the soles of their feet until it is prepared in the part that was previously mentioned.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the matter is not forgotten, then take their feet and move them vigorously, and gradually place your hand on what is over their hypochondriacs until the matter can be reached above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then gently insert your hands and equalize the patient little by little, and command the woman to express herself until the matter is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The patient lies completely on one of their sides.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	If possible, reduce the abdomen of the patient, but if you cannot do that, then lift the woman and make her go to the bathroom.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot go to the bathroom, then make her lie on her left side, and shake the parts of her vigorously, and gradually administer laxatives that you have and recommend them for enemas.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	When the child is born, then make that sign on the brazen tablet, and study the reduction of the womb, and equalize the figure of the woman, and make her vomit and command her to understand whether she has been delivered.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The child is lying on its back, with its hands expanded and its foot at the side of its mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife should hold the child's womb and gradually turn it, and that should facilitate.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is equalized and how much it is, then pause over the child's chest with that which we have recommended for oil and mucilage.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command the child to gradually open its mouth, and when you have done that, then make that sign on a brazen tablet and command it to be inclined over the right side, and then command it to understand; and make it vomit.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the prepared child is on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the midwife inserts her hand into the mother's womb in this manner, consider, and then you insert the second finger into that which should be emptied of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then insert your hand into the abdomen to prevent it from being retained and dying.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then gently push the fetus towards the parts that are not covered by the second sheet, and send the woman to get some rags, and let the midwife do her job, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of many twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that the rags used for twins or multiple fetuses are not natural, and sometimes three or four are needed, but that is strange and causes distress; but it is a natural cause, and not a living one.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, whether they are multiplied, one by one, and they are separated by the cord in the navel of each of those, and some rags are used as if it is a fetus born naturally, and its use is with some rags for unnatural purposes, as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If it is difficult to remove them from their position and they reach the condition we have mentioned about the unnatural figures, then cure those as we have reported.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what facilitates and subtlety, and is timely, and has engineering according to all figures according to what is prepared by the engineer leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women give birth to one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and it is already verified that one woman aborts six times, and another gives birth to all of them, the cause of which is made by the measurement of the glorious saints.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this should be in the knowledge of the midwife that it is very useful for that part which resembles that, and therefore pause on that which she knows.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus that we have mentioned in the division of medicine and it is not deformed, and you find that the woman is of healthy virtue and not affected by any of the accidents for which she is feared to be lost.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be lying on her left side, with her head leaning to one side and her legs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the assistant should hold two of her hands or be lying on her left side to prevent the woman's body from extending during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the mouth of the woman with oil and a mixture of mint, fennel, and sesame seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And the midwife should place her hand on those oils and mixtures, and then insert her hand in the womb to help with the extraction of the fetus, and then press on the area where the umbilical cord is attached to the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	In these cases: then you consider whether the fetus is ready to be born and then you feel for the umbilical cord in the neck of the fetus, or in the collarbone, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or behind the beard, or in the shoulder blades, or in the locations appropriate for the ribs.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the swelling is on his feet, then in the plantar fascia, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And hold the needle with the bent part of the hand, and place the curve of the hand over that place between the thumb and index finger, and insert the hand with ease and put the needle in any of those places we have mentioned, until you reach the cause of the pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then place and hold another needle in the same position, or the third if necessary, so that it is attached equally, and not stretched too much.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let the needle be inserted at all parts, so that the pain of the tooth is relieved as it is done in the extraction of the tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And hold in that place where the extension is softened; and if any part of it is held, then hold some oil and insert those experiments and turn those that are held.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the flesh is forgotten, then move the needles to another place that is more appropriate; and do this until all the flesh is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the limb is bent towards the other and it is not possible to reduce it by traction, then cover that area with a cloth; then extract it from within so that everything is removed, and incise it at the joint or in the groin.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same in the other limb and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the bone is large, or if there is an accident in the traction, or if it is not properly adjusted to the cap, then insert spines between the said parts and saw through the head and extract the bone, or use an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will be shown in the figures of other instruments in the capital.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, if the bone is naturally large: and then cut it with an osteotome or use an instrument as we have mentioned; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is bent and tractioned by the collarbone, then cut through it so that the moisture that is in the chest is drained.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated, nor obese, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to your ability.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the wound in the belly is pus-filled or is in the hydropic state, then you should pierce that part where the moisture is located.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the wound is on the soles of the feet, then the direction of the wound should be towards the mouth of the great toe.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If it is tightly bound, then you should remove the cloth that has been wrapped around your hand, and then incise the belly and chest where that moisture is located.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are still present and the head returns, then insert your right hand into the mouth; but if the mouth of the great toe is open, then insert your hand into the opening, encircle the head, and pull that hand towards the mouth of the great toe, and then insert one or two fingers.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed by an abscess that has occurred to her, then do not force it open; before doing so, first administer an injection of warm, thick humid causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply ointments; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the wound is on their side, if possible, it should be pierced: and that which we have said about the live wound should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be incised with a knife, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And do not leave any cause of death in the second stomach.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your work, then administer that which we have said about the cure of abscesses that have occurred to the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flux of sanction, then dismiss them into strengthening waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in the belly of whom was born dead, and another woman approached the fire, and another made the dead one.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to him that for a long time he had an abscess in his belly; and when it opened, fire came out, and he began to shake his arms.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed some strong-attracting plaster on him and waited several days, and then removed another bone; and I was very amazed, as there were no bones in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead baby.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So I continued to remove the wound, and extracted from him several small bones, the woman existing in her many positions, and had been like that for a long time, correcting her little arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not affirm that it was strange, but rather that in that case there is knowledge and help for that which the skilled doctor gives for healing administration.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of tools that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of a spoon is used for this purpose:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a forceps in which the free parts are grasped, to which grip two spoons are attached at both ends of two handles.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this spoon should be more slender than a constrictor, and it should be made of soft or bamboo wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the thickness of each handle should be two fingers wide and the margin of each end should be one finger wide, and the length of each should be a palm and a little more; and in the middle of the two handles there are two adjustments of that measured staff, which are already fixed, of which the length is the greatest of a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the spoon so that they can be grasped when you turn the two prescribed spoons.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to that of a more subtle and less painful one:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Should be made from wood or bone according to the appearance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the end of each of these additions there should be sometimes with handles, and the length of those handles is one span, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the larger one, then you place your hand on the left side of the feet hanging down, and put that which is between the patient's thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then raise your hand with the instrument that is similar to forceps, according to the amount you want of the appreciation of the mouth of the larger one until the midwife makes it so that you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of virtue which the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impelling which is pushed against the fetus:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of an amidate which is held in the large head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps at the end of which there are sometimes handles, and some of them are made long like forceps according to this form, sometimes with handles which are sharpened and held.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of administration for the remedy:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of application with a needle:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of application with two needles:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps with a beak that can hold the tip of the finger:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spatula with two ends, where the tip is removed:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two flat spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercised, and as more species of them are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it becomes easier for their operation and also easier for the people due to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should not be without those instruments, whether they are in your possession or not, as the need for them is not excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction of the second tooth:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second tooth is held, you should command the patient to hold their own tongue, and then perform that sternutation condition, and place your hand on their mouth and on their nose, and if by chance it is deformed or broken, so be it.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take an egg and pierce it on the cover with a needle and place it in those herbs that are burning at the mouth of the mare, such as calamint, rough mint, and camomile, and Arabic and cassia wood, and santolina.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the egg, and place it on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a canula of canary bird in the mouth of the mare, and hold it inside until the vapor comes to the concavity of the mare.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then do that which we have said, and the second time remove it quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this cure is not effective and does not work, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of althea, and place it inside the womb and massage it, and when the second time she has found it, take it and extend it little by little if it is attached to the prepuce of the mare, then place her second hand as we have recommended, and when she has found the second one, extract it little by little correctly so that the mare does not choke from the force.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before placing the patient on their side to facilitate the procedure.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	Then adjust the amount of attraction so that it obeys and avoids adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the main doctor is covered, we have already recommended the cure by sneezing and the medicine of the eye with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if all the causes that we have recommended are not forgotten, then guard this so that you do not perform it in an iteration of abstraction, but rather bring what is necessary from the patient to the mouth of the main doctor and apply it to the woman's cushion with chalk and tetra-pharmacon; because that will cause it to dissolve and be forgotten after a few days.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it dissolves, raise the patient's head and stomach, and that will help the patient; and then bring what is administered as sub-fumigations and appropriate for that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But the ancients have already discovered the use of sub-fumigation with nitrous and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an instrument by which the woman is submerged in steam for the retention of menstruation and the secondinea.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of iron or brass.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And it should be placed with the narrow end in the container and the wide end over the fire, and the steam should be poured over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that one until that steam is consumed and repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the cure of the child's non-perforated anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When newborn children and their anuses are not perforated, which have been thin and oiled.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then ask the midwife to pierce that thin oil; and if not, pierce that space sharply, and make sure it does not touch the tail.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place over that wet and oiled cloth; and then cure that space until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it will become oily, then place a tube in the anus for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if there is an accumulation of pus or abscess in the anus for consolidation; then cut that consolidation and cure it with what we have said about the cure and the plaster.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the body, which are caused by the pressure of the intestines or in the space between the thighs.
E es una fistula o motas.	And if it is a fistula or a fistula.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And if that condition is ancient and comes from the moisture of white or thin pus, and some worms penetrate some of these fistulas.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those worms are known by the fact that they come out through the anus and by their softness; and some use the patient's excrement for this, and often they come from these worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas are worms in the space that penetrate into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and some of these worms penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the back of the thigh.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	When it is known as a penetrating or non-penetrating fistula in the anus, you insert your finger into the anus, and then gently insert a thin iron probe into the fistula when there is no tenderness.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is tenderness in that area, then gently insert a thin bristle or horsehair probe into the area until you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel any of these symptoms or if there is no cause for constipation, vomiting, or diarrhea, as we have said, then it is non-penetrating, and then treat it accordingly.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the urethra, then the meaning of this is that it is urine from that area and prohibited for that location to be treated with medicine so that it can be healed.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it penetrates into the joint or bone and causes pain in the circulation, then it is likely that the probe will perforate the bone if there is no tenderness in the bone, and cause pain in the circulation of the affected part; and that it may not be healed quickly; and that it is not suitable for this medicine, nor is it consolidated with a poultice.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all these penetrating fistulas, there is no cure for everything, and the cure of those is laborious and depends on the knowledge of doctors upon which it is based.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In those that are not penetrating and not ancient, healing is simple according to what I have advised you, and that which has already been done and tested.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient should lie between your hands above his stomach and raise his legs into his abdomen, the cushions should be inclined towards his belly, and then insert a probe, or a piece of cloth if there is turgidity in the fistula, until you know the location where the probe enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the anus, then you should introduce your finger into the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already penetrating, another thing is to feel between your finger and that part of the flesh, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and therefore do not treat in that place, because it is not healing, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	May it be said that this is a sign of health in some men.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medicine for which it is hoped that it will be greatly helpful in this, you should use a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously described, and introduce that fire into the fistula until it reaches around the bone; and then repeat that dose or three times until you know that all those tissues adjusted by the fistulae that resemble a quill of a goose are adhered.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then care for those wounds wrapped in bandages until all those tissues that are adhered are completely healed; and then care for the flesh-generating and consolidating medicine, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, it is not healthy at any time by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the thread goes in and does not penetrate into the wound that is in the anus, and between that and the thread that is covered with flesh or fat, and if the fistula is in that place where it touches the surface of the bone, then dry the bone from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if the thread is dry, and it should be in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the end of the thread is, and through the thread it is released and catheterized.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulas that are assembled like a quill pen and do not have any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	However, if there is blood flow between you and your operation when inserting those fistulas, then milk the milk that is there and use the least sharp instrument to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, because a cauterizing instrument with fire adjusts well: it adjusts those fistulas and extracts the blood from the excesses of humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then care for those calluses that are wrapped in cloth or in a three-fold way before that place gets warm, and then care for the wound by applying a hard flesh that generates and consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And use those medicines that have stoptic and dessication properties; when it is restored, it is healed and there is no risk of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	However, if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is extended from there to the surface of the body, then insert the finger into the anus and examine that one.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if the tent is placed between you and the patient and it is made of silk or flesh, and it is prepared for penetration, at that moment it is not an operation on him but a second way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer it in him one of three ways: either to cauterize that which we have said; or to separate that which you can reach the cavity of him so that you can enter the things and the proposed cure, and do not process any cutting so that you do not pierce the skin containing the gut, and what happens on the patient is immediately after the procedure; and then cure that with that which we have said that is very useful for healing; or to lengthen that tent and wound that which secures that entrance into the gut, as we have said, or with that tent or another sharp instrument, and then muffle those fistulas that are in the section of the gut where you can perform cauterization; and then force yourself to make the restoration of all the part affected by the section, and if the opening does not consolidate, and remains open in the part of the buttocks, and is more serious for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, the fistula is finished according to this method: when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is around the surface of the rectum and on the edge of the rectum, then take a perforated extremity, which is like an awl for preparing the wound in this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert it into that surrounding layer of vessels or around those; and then insert the tent into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates the edge of the rectum nearby, then you extract that thread from where you inserted your own into the rectum; and extract the end of that thread and adjust both ends, and leave them for a day or two, and when more of that thread is inserted into the flesh, remove those parts that are between the two ends of the thread and that cause pain.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound where it has become consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifices of the fistula are not penetrating, then make them penetrate, in whatever way you prepare, but not too much so as not to injure the skin; and then apply medicine to that area until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatula that is used to pierce the fistula: its curvature is sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not injure that which is not necessary, sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of stitching of hernias in which there is swelling at the beginning of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hernias are of two kinds, one of which is between the buttocks and resembles a bag, or those which are like a hernia of the groin.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those, there are small and large ones, and that the swelling comes from those immediately and is one, and its cause, and its location in the buttocks, and at the edges of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those which are located in the buttocks according to the few amount of moisture, from which there is a yellowish discharge or a small amount of swelling, and its color is like that.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is in the womb is that you command the patient to lie down and expel it while the fetus is still developing and the placenta appears to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you kneel and hang your fingers or whatever you have at hand, and then incise those parts of hers that are her ribs.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	However, if your fingers are not suitable for those parts due to their moisture and softness of those, then take those with a rough cloth or a rough piece of wool, and extract them with the tongs, and then incise those and powder some charcoal dust over them at the beginning, so that they become a cauterizing agent; or cauterize them according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the wound does not open, then christen the patient with a small bitter herb, and wash him with that water which is in the womb and which facilitates the opening of the wound more when the patient expels it.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the swollen parts deform the anus, then the cause is probably feces, and you should remove them with your nail or with a spoon, scrape them off, and then care for them with what we have mentioned until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And that person who previously inserted should administer a second suture according to this method: take a thread and wrap it around the needle, and then extract the swollen parts from the upper parts, and let that penetrate with the needle in the center of the other part, and wrap the two extra parts of the thread on the part behind the needle, and lengthwise; and strengthen the swollen part with the structure strongly, and then tie the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do that to all of them, and leave one of them undisturbed so that the excess blood from that one can flow out of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place a cloth soaked in rose-scented oil or salve on the anus, and place that over the wound and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that person in that bed; and when it is healed, cure those wounds with ointment or some other treatment until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Causes of ulcers that occur due to dryness of the wound or by nature's constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if those remedies do not work in that medicine, then you should apply those with a needle or your nail into which they have been made wet and hold them over the scabs of that pus above, which prevents them from consolidation; and then cure those that have consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And then apply those with very strong pus that the first one has been healed and have been excoriated; and then cure those that have been healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of hernias, it is known.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	It is known that hernias, it is not known, and not if not noted redon like the color of the body similar to the crown of a helmet, and it is made in the whole body and especially in the parts behind the feet and those, and it causes pain for those who have them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then, cut that which is in the circle of the claw, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its root; and then care for that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the second one that precedes in its capital.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Warts are small, sharp, round fistulas on the surface of the body, and they cause pain in the joints of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The cure for it is to extend and cut that one, or to remove it with forceps or a needle.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize that one as well, as we have said, with fire or sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they have already been removed in both directions using the instrument I said.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Ants are small, feathered or large fistulas on the surface of the body, and when they bite that one is centipede-like in appearance, and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The care for that is to take a needle made of iron or copper, and it should be strong, and place it on the edge of the wound where it contains the circle of the needle parts; and then rotate your hand with the needle inside the circle of the wound, and place it at the front of the flesh, and remove the worm from its place.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do that with a needle made of silver or iron in this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part above the needle should be thin and sharp, not piercing (not perforated), wrapped by someone who knows how to make the wound and the rotation of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the worm according to what is called in the cauterization of athyls in the chapter of cauteries.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of the instruments that are administered to give chastity.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some virgins are made chastity of silver or copper or iron melted or hammered; and some virgins are made of those instruments small and large according to those with which they are administered, because the one that is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose asses are fat or doloyrozes, the chastities of those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The large and small intestines:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the catheter is placed above it, and the bag should be wide according to this method; and at the distance where the bag is placed, it should be like this.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	The end of the catheter is left, which is inserted into the anus, and should be thin (if it is not open) like a lion, behind a subtlety; and on one side of the catheter's two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should be according to the size of the rays and the largest a little.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines for the bladder of an animal or wool of a sheep are placed, and the reason for it is one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with a thin needle according to this method; and if the space between the holes is the largest, then
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And insert the thin needle firmly into those holes, or around them; and adjust the bag; and when the bag is placed in it, it should be straight in the intestine between two distinct strong constrictions, and then inject each hole: May the quality of injecting each hole is that you fill the medicine bag, which should be scalded according to the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be turned on their back, and their legs raised, with something under them like a pillow or a blanket; and then apply some ointment made of oil or albumen of egg or fenugreek mucilage or similar substance to the anus to facilitate evacuation, and the nurse should hold the basin and express what is inside until it is all evacuated from the intestine; and then remove the cristero and the patient can lower their legs against the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if that remedy does not work, hold it as long as possible; and if the patient sleeps throughout the night, it is better to do so in a bed.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you administer the cristero to the patient in the solution of the bowel and the expression of it, then repeat the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are moles or abscesses in the anus, then use a thin and sharp cristero, of the kind that children's cristeros are made of.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	It has already been said in the division of the treatment of wounds that this is suitable for free people, and thus it is said about the treatment of those who are not free and with medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that wounds are diverse according to what kind of wounds they are and where the wounds are located.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which some wounds are made are similar to those of a stone, or incision with a spear or a dagger, or percussion by a lance, or a mace, or a sword, or similar to those of other causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the wounds that are in the parts of the body be similar to those of a head wound, or neck, or chest, or stomach, or thigh, and similar to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And it is recommended that some wounds be treated according to that reasoning and rule for other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, as the memory of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore it is said that when a simple head plague occurs and is not a fracture, if it is caused by a stone or something similar, and has only been treated with saliva and is very painful and you fear the patient may develop an abscess, then you should first apply leeches to the cephalic region, and do not delay; and then extract the stone according to the amount of its virtue if no other cause prevents leeching, especially if the stone that was in the plague is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if leeching is not possible on the opposite side of the affected part, then keep the patient on a soft diet and avoid heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is any cause that prevents mincing, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or fish.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And if an abscess develops in the plague, apply a poultice of rose oil or of something else that is stiptic.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are sure of the abscess and pause on the wound, if it is recent and its pus has not changed, then apply a little powder that I will recommend soon.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	If the air has already changed, then pause on the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or is at the beginning of a space and its lips are not adjusted by pegs, then adjust them according to what I will recommend about their stitching.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound has already been discovered from the bone and meat, and is not retained but only a small suspender, then insert that and care for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to be fed on foods in which there is grease: caps and forms similar to theirs, until it is complete.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if the flesh in the wound putrefies and does not adhere to the bone, then insert all that rottenness and remove it, and care for that.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these areas there is an artery or vein from which unhealthy blood can flow, and it is not removed by medical means, then you should examine the artery, and if you find it not incised, then you should incise it with a needle or ligate it; and if necessity requires that what we have said does not work, then you should cauterize where the unhealthy blood is being removed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is easily found; however, if you powder them with this powder, which becomes solidified in the presence of air, it moves those wounds.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is as follows: take one part of broken olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished herbs; mix all this together thoroughly, and fill the wound, and hold it in place with a good constriction inside the body, and coagulate it with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then tightly bandage the wound above with the powder and leave it there until it does not become infected, because it cannot be cured from there by medicine until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And some women used to do that alone, when they were not in your presence and had no dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this meticulous operation is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to place them over those and to straighten them, and their recent wounds are left open, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially in the summer, then do not apply this powder, but first cure those with what we have said, either by placing it on those wounds with a decoction of bread and water that has been boiled; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if the wound is a fracture of the bone, and it is small, then you should extract that with this method.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the cure of fractures of the head in that which is venomous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the pain occurs in the neck, it is not different in medicine, and between the pain of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves of the neck are cut or the artery, then if it is nerves, not in that engine but rather avoid treatment with that which causes very strong hemostasis, as ziniar and zegi say that it is veratrum and similar to their quar nozo to the nerves and contracts them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place your hand over any cause of the pain, because the substance of the nerves is fragile and its continuity is attached to the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that which is cured by false medicines, as if it is caused by washed with hot water, some vinegar in olive oil roasted or not roasted, and then when washed with hot water and the other stones are minced according to this manner, and found humanity.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the pain is great, then administer stitches, or cut the lips of it, and then cure that with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the pain is deep or there are accidents at the lowest part of the foot, then prick it in the most depressed area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If the pain is already cutting an artery and blood flow is achieved, then separate or dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent that from happening.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the spines of the horse's tail have already been cut off or completely, and the veins of the collar are saved, then adjust the lips of the suture on the canal of the tail and do not touch that; equal it to that and return it to its natural figure, and strengthen it with a structure decent, and leave it for several days; and care for it with ointments in which there is stipticitat and excitacio until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the pain has already made fractures in the bone, then perforate it, and if there are fragments of bone, extract all those that you can from it; and what is not visible to you, leave it until the pain subsides, and it is separated and the wound is healed.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then powder it with the same powder that was recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the wound has formed an abscess, then treat it with the same remedy that will soon be remembered in its capital.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds of the neck or similar ones that are made between the ribs and are treated with a sponge, a needle, a lancet, or similar instruments.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If the lancet or needle is inserted, and you can see its depth, then consider whether the wound has bleeding when the patient inhales; then you will know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth and the wound is recent to its source, then you place powder on it during the first hour, and do not strain it so that it does not remain in the depth of it and that it returns to the body and that no one harms the patient, but rather place a moist cloth on it.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the wound is not present, then place your hand on the opening of the wound, to let out that which comes from the moisture; and make the patient lie on their side so that the liquid can drain.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the wound has been open for three days or more and no spasms, tremors, heart pain, or stricture have occurred, and other symptoms are good, then know that the wound is healing; and therefore treat it with compresses and other treatments until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the wound is delayed, and it has been opened for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; therefore treat it according to its capital.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is due to a cut of a blade or a knife, and it is simple on the surface of the skin or back, then treat it with water that precedes stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If the wound has already formed in the bones, and it is not healing, then twist the wound and try to extract those fragments, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then remove the intestines that may cause the pain, as their extraction is beneficial.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other pains that occur in other members, the cure is the same as what we have mentioned.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the pains of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition that occurs in the belly is either large, or small, or middling.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the large ones, some of them are the intestines or nerves of the belly, for which insertion of them and stitching of them is made to be more forceful and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And disruption of the small ones is made difficult by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult, so do not delay in inserting them to their proper place as soon as possible, because if they are opened and become swollen, the instrument for them becomes difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is middling, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the intestines, as it is difficult in the two special cases mentioned.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You know that there are four ways to close a belly wound, but two common ones are suitable for closing wounds in other parts of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Two other suturas are common for other parts of the body, but they are more suitable for closing the belly wound.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend you to each one according to its exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, say that when the wound is small and there is no cause of the intestine for it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then one of the two methods is used: either by disruption as we have said, or when the intestine swells due to cold from the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And then when that is done, cover it with a cloth that you have dipped in warm water and wrung out, or take a cloth soaked in hot water, cyperus, spice, and embrocation at that intestine inside until the swelling is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some times it is done in that which has stopticity, and it is better than the water alone in resolving the swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see that the inflammation is resolved, then moisten the intestine with water that is cool and mild, which is helpful for the intestine to recover quickly.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	And if the intestine is excised, then cut the disruption with a small sharp instrument that is sharp and incises easily.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first cure is best when it is properly done and does not cause drying or unnecessary occupation of the necessary and sufficient space.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, its shape is as follows:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is sharp and pointed, the other part is not sharp, its tip is thin and not as thin as a needle, but slightly blunt at the end.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, then reduce it back to its original form in its proper place, if possible, which is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is large and in the lower part of the belly, then have the patient lie on their back, and place their knees as high as possible above their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place your hand on their head and raise their chest as high as possible.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, quickly place your understanding and consideration on the side that is causing pain, so that the part causing pain is pushed away from the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And in this case, you administer it in severe and mild pains.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small pains, place the preparation you have made, and make sure that the minister holds the disruption completely in his hand and adjusts its lips, and uncover from one to another if there is any cause for another stitch.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suture: you take the needle, or count the number of the width of the pain; and lay it at the end of the disruption of the said ring, and strengthen the needle one, or do not put it in the two ends of the thread that is left over from the part that is left out, enter that you make that penetrate from that part; and you have added two ends of the thread and two ends of the cipher, and it has been made four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen the double thread in the circle of the needle, and some stitches on the two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by addition of decency; and then lay the largest of the latter and insert another needle into that, and then tie it as it was with the first needle; and do not cease to do this until all the contraction of the wound is completed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of medium thickness between coarseness and fineness, because the fine needles more easily penetrate the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to thread, and therefore it is advisable that they be of medium thickness in terms of fineness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And do not let the needle be stuck in the two ends of the thread prepared for that, so that the flesh is not easily penetrated and that the wound heals before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not let the stitches be too long so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then insert the tips of the needles so that they do not pierce the patient's skin; and place powdered substances on the suture, which hold the tips of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of sutures with needles should be used in small wounds, as they have one or two or several needles in their suture.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second type of suture is similar: and it is that you administer the suture to the four extremities, of the codeine and two extremities of the scapula, in a straight line, with a needle that is thin and thick.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that part of the thread where it started, so that the thread does not rise again from the wound, so that the suture is the second type of thread made of cloth.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the amount of thick hair from that same beard.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch will be for women.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And this stitch would have been used to close the wound that occurred in a man's belly, which was stitched with a needle, and was a tear of the major abdominal wall, and was situated around two palms of the intestine at the lower part of the body and was the tear in the middle of the member; and then I would have reduced it so that the intestine had been out of the wound for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and it was closed and healed; and then I would have applied that and it would have been converted into its positions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and because of a miracle fire, why I did not close that wound, which was in a place where the wound was not at all or any medicine, but I kept it over the wound for two days and bathed it assiduously with melted honey until the fire healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two specific types of sutures according to the narrative of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And if you begin with the suture of the cord, insert the needle from the edge to the center.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so, as the needle pierces the cord and those fingers are moved correctly and throughout the entire body, leave the extremity of the needle in which you inserted the needle; and make the other end of the needle pierce from the edge to the center on the other side of the mat.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And so, after you have made that pierce, make another pierce in the other end of the needle on the same side of the mat from the edge to the center; and leave the extremity of the needle that is on this side, and make the other end of the needle pierce from the edge to the center on the other side of the mat.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the other end of the needle pierce in the direction that makes that pierce in the needle at its extremity, which is in the edge of the mat where all that pierces.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then, approaching from that direction and bending over the other side of the chest, extract the needle from the incision it has made, and return it to its sheath on that side; and then, approaching from this side, extract the needle from the incision it has made, and return it to its sheath on this side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Do this several times, and do it again in another way, approaching from another direction, until you have completed all of that which is deformed according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this method of suture is that you sew the wound with a thread of silk, so that you do not sew the chest once from the side of the incision, and let the other side complete the stitching.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second special method of suture, which is called the "Gualia" by doctors, and this is what should be done for each part and throughout the body, is that you sew that second semilunar part, which other doctors sew together with another piece of cloth, so that all the parts are joined to their corresponding parts; and then apply the end of one side to the other end of the wound, and the end of the mirror to the other end of the wound, and this is done according to your recommendation.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you place the needle at the end of the mirror near your own part, make it penetrate into the part of the body from that side, and let two other ends of the cipher; then revolving the needle, make it penetrate from one side to the other two ends of the cipher.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then rotate those needles, and make each one penetrate into the body from one side to the other two ends of the mirror that are on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suture is better than the common suture of leather, and it is the suture that was previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Guaila
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And moreover, it is said that the suture of the belly is corrected with two needles, so you should insert one in each, and begin with the insertion of the needle of which you are supposed to use, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the second suture of those that equally cover the hearts.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When the disruption occurs in the middle of the abdomen, it is more difficult to suture than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of the medical treatment of plague is a judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you obtain the plague recently from the same person who has it, and reduce the intestine and cleanse it and prepare it indecently, then place powder on it.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then place on it alcohol with which you have present that makes hard and heals wounds, and is consolidated and shiny; and cure it as is the cure of other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have the medicines present, then place on it immediately, before it starts to rot, with vinegar and change the bandages daily, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not need other medication in dispositions when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague might spread to the main members, then apply a wool cloth soaked in high-quality oil or rose oil, and place it around the areas where the toes are located and remove them.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, which is a sign that something is wrong, then apply a black stypic wound powder, and especially if the putrefaction has reached the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you should know that the pus from the large intestine is less dangerous for healing than the pus in the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to heal the intestine called "gegunu" because it does not receive healing from any disease that occurs in it; this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, and its length, and the subtlety of its tissue, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If that which precedes the plague is the cloth, and you have recently had that, reduce it according to your correctness, which reduces the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has passed to the space and is already turned or not, then you should place a bandage on the area that is discolored from it, so that blood flow comes out of the veins and arteries in the cloth.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert that which is another of those ligaments, and place two ends of the bandage hanging from the part of the plague before the plague, so that above you is relieved the attraction of it from the cavity of the cloth and emission of the brace of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues that happen in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because they saw that one who was previously plagued in their belly with percussion of lance and was the plague of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and they managed to restore its mobility and vitality.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I continued the cure of him who was not yet healed, but I stopped subtly that which healed and the wound became solidified.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And then I placed on the patient that which I had prepared over him for the wound in his own belly; and he did not have any other harm from that wound and remained in his bed, eating and drinking, and afterwards it was buried and exercised in its place.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And then it was said by experienced people that when there is an abscess in the intestine, and it is small, one should follow this method: and it is that you take thick needles; and then adjust the two lips of the abscess and place a needle from those which have the mouth open over the two lips of the abscess; when you put on those and strengthen your mouth, cut off the cap of it, so that it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another needle near the first one, and do not stop doing that until you have done it for all the abscess.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that area and place it on the wound; and remove those things attached to the intestine inside the intestine so as not to harm the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine can be sutured with a thin, sharp needle made from animal intestine, rather than using a regular needle; and you should take hold of the end of these thin threads of intestine, which should be clean, and then wrap the end of the intestine around it, and then insert that thread into the wound, and suture it with those threads.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing is only the second method of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then it cannot be sewn up, but rather treated with cauterization, and not healed from it completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the cure of fistulas and abscesses.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You should know that any wound and abscess that becomes indurated and scarred, and is made into an ulcer, and does not consolidate and bleed continuously and is not removed, in whatever part of the body it is, universally it is called a fistula, and we call it that disease.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And in truth, a fistula is a hard, white, painless ulcer that is located where the penis is attached to the scrotum; and because of this, it is called a penile ulcer.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in wet men, the ulcer that causes this is often accompanied by a discharge of pus within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is moved, and it is thin, thick, and fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division, as I said about wounds, that any ulcer that is not healed or not in its natural state of flesh is due to one of these causes: some of which are due to a lack of proper nutrition; or due to malicious intent; or because the flesh between the ulcer and the lips is hard and prevents the growth of new flesh; or due to a mottled appearance; or because the ulcer itself is poorly formed and the material that is around it is of bad quality; or due to improper medication in its treatment; or when corruption catches in the region, and it becomes pestilence; or due to the nature of the region, as in Saragossa, where digestion of evils is difficult, and healing of abscesses takes a long time by nature.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Now it has shown all those causes, and their symptoms and the cure of them in the division of medical treatments.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And now I will tell you how to perform the cure of a fistula that is made by surgical operation.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; among those that reach the great veins, arteries, nerves, spleen, intestine, bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the spinal vertebrae, or some of the joints composed by a composition as mentioned above.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And among those that are of this kind, which is difficult to heal, and does not receive cure or treatment, and occupation in this case is hard work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of the fistulas has a depth that does not reach those places mentioned, and you expect and believe in its cure, and you want to reach knowledge of it, then take trial with an iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight, and you find it there.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate with a thin probe, as the weight of their body helps to straighten and relieve the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is too wide, it may not be possible to insert the thin probe into it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then insert the catheter through its orifices, as the moisture that you use to clean it will also clean the other orifices and remove them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then carefully inquire, according to the method that you are able to determine whether there are bones or nerves here, and whether the longitudinal or propdana fistula is its cavity, or if it is a fistula with many openings that is located above all of your strength, your uncertainty, your patient's pain, and the invention of the pain due to your compression on the affected area, and similar to the meanings and causes of accidents to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all these causes with stability, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and it is whether you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in salt, longitudinal of joint, of nerve, of artery, of vein, or of one of the places that I have told you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And after you have dried the fistula according to the name of its nature, and removed that which is in that filter and decayed flesh, and that which is born in the orifices of the flesh, or from the intestines and similar, and cure that within which it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and is straight, then cut it as much as possible in front, and remove all the decayed flesh; and administer cautery cottons wrapped in acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that to it for some time until the acute medicine has corroded all that which is in the cavity of the fistula of the decay.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it does not heal by that, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be confirmed to you, then inquire about that and dry it with the second method we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member present as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is under your control and it is in any corruption and blackness, then remove that which is inside the corruption entirely; and cure that which is inside with that which will heal it.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and the bone is as it was before, then know that you have not reached the total eradication of the corruption; and then you should remove it again carefully and make the reason for it and the cleansing of it with the strongest fortification, and then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And then if it is healed, good; and if not, know that that corruption is in the deep length of the body, which has not been achieved, and then you should not force it but leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the bone is broken and small, or it is possible to pull it out, then use delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If you have the strength to extract all of those, and none are held by any cause of your weakness.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you encounter any opposition from some cause of humidity, and in its beginning there is no fear or mistake, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you do not have the preparation of bones from the bone bank, then place that which can harden the bone in that place, and let it remain there until that which is around those bones of flesh and ligaments is consolidated, and keep the plate so that it is not consolidated, and strengthen the section that you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having said that, if you fear, place it on the side submerged in three parts of oil, or the side submerged in Egyptian wine, or in any of the oils, because when they harden those ligaments, and the bones are separated from them, the healing is delayed.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If there is a large bone like those of the thigh or cushion or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the face of it, then rub that resin only behind where that blackness and corruption is, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the area where the corruption reaches, and then cure that before it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend that you have someone who has had an injury in their thigh to place that and assistance on your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around the age of thirty, who had pain in his thigh, and from the parts that were swollen on the matter of the body inside where the matter reaches the thigh, and that matter is a large abscess, and not an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the doctor extended the fire too close to that part where the abscess was about to burst, and matter flowed from it, and his cure was paused near where the bed became fistulated, and in those matters there were open wounds which all oozed pus and moisture from the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then all the doctors treated him for about two years, and the fire was not in that place but in the arm, until he was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And he saw the bed covered with those matters flowing from those wounds; and that man's body was completely wasted away and the color of it was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then he inserted the tent into one of those wounds and reached the tent to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then he quickly examined those wounds and found that they had reached all parts of the bed.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then he showed and inserted into one of those wounds, through which he described a part of the bone, and at the same time rotted that, and it was already rotten and corrupted and decayed; and a part of the body had already penetrated into the intestines.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then you should apply that which was previously discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And then you should apply that which was not in the bone but rather that corruption which was removed and prepared, and which had already been applied.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then you should place your hand over the wound with a consolidating medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then you should repeat and expose again over the bone secondarily over the first exposure, and continue to apply the remaining corruption to the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And then you should apply that which appears from that corruption, and then you should pierce it to make the cure of it and restore it, and it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you should expose it again and continue to scratch the bone little by little particularly and pierce the restoration of it, and it is not restored until you have scratched around one palm of it, and that which was extracted from its marrow, and then apply it with a medicine, and it is consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And repetition is not necessary in the operation of amputation or section of the limb unless for the disposition of the patient's wound and for the scarcity of their tolerance and fear of death, which can lead to complications in all hours due to excessive evacuation of sincopi.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore, the treatment is for complete healing, and nothing is in place of hard meat; and it is good to arrange it in its own body and return its vitality; and it is managed in its arrangements and not done against it in ambulation or harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bone is in place of the body that has been fractured, then follow this method: and it is that you take a bandage and strong thread at the end of that protruding bone, and command anyone to extend it; pause that bandage of thicker wool than the first bandage; and place it on the flesh that is left after the bone, and extend the outside of it so that it pulls the flesh to the parts left, and you uncover the flesh over the place that you want to suture so that the stitch does not hurt the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place the table beside the bones carefully, because when you do that, it is not prohibited for the saw to not dry out the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And cover the sawing over the rotten area gradually, because if it is in the hollow of the bone corruption and does not appear on its surface, then another method should be used for sawing.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is rotten and not eminent, then from one continuous piece to another, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you should remove all the flesh from all parts; and place the saw beside, and place the saw of the first piece where the corruption is continued until the sawing of the other piece is completed.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if the sawing is according to the location of the corruption, then it should be done gradually, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, then insert into that rotten joint, and saw the bone where the other part continues.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in the reason but in the joint itself.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is quite difficult; however, you should inquire about the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and remove that, and monitor it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and when no contrary vein or nerve comes out, it should be corrected to you.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know what are the saws and the serrations to cut these bones, depending on the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and poverty of those, and their hardness and rarity; therefore, you should prepare all kinds of instruments suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that that operation means to you on the specialty of the instrument that is necessary; when you have great study and length and knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of the ways of illnesses, then you will already have them for your use, what is suitable for each instrument for every disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you should know the number of simple instruments that you will use in this chapter, which you will process according to your prohibition, which you will experience on the others.
Forma de serra:	A saw blade:
Forma de autra serra:	A different saw blade:
Forma de autra serra:	A different saw blade:
Forma de autra serra gran:	A large different saw blade:
Forma de ray:	A ruler:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this ruler is in the shape of a star-shaped crown, and its points are in the shape of the points on an astrolabe.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And you should only use it to rub the heads of joints when they are damaged, or if the mouth is very wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	A larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	A smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	A wide razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	A different saw blade made of iron, with a curved shape and sharpness, and the handle of it is made of wood:
Forma de lu:	The shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of a razor in which there is a hollow:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Another shape of a razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another curved razor:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of a small razor resembling a needle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of an incisor that cuts through bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Another smaller shape of an incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another incisor, resembling a ray, and its end is like a saw, and it is used in certain places in the ratio of bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of a ray that is suitable for the ratio of the one that pierces through bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and has a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly covered with a layer that all the causes that we have said about razors, incisors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the cutting edges of bones and their sawing.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The ends may be sharp or due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or because you have treated that corruption by those medicines and the cure does not succeed, or sometimes the corruption causes the member to die, which is not cut by any cause, then cover that member within that wound, so that the patient can escape from that death or harm, which is greater than the damage to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	When the member of the one who was affected, is that the limb is made black before it is cooked by fire, or if it is poorly made, approach the blackness before the pore does enter that limb and if it enters that limb, it takes all the body; and so you should begin to cure it.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if it is caused by the corruption of some poisonous causes such as from a scorpion marsh or from a viper or from a rattle snake and similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the pressure is at the end of that limb, then you should insert it and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter the body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	Similarly, if it enters the body, then you should insert that of the reed of the fire, and not give space to the corruption until it takes in the reed of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you have done that, then insert the arm into the hollow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption and the poison passes around the hollow, then in that case the patient dies; and administering another cause in cure is of no use in treatment.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, when decay has destroyed the nail of the foot, then you insert that into one of the bones.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take the sole of the foot, then you insert the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it can enter into the ankle, then you insert the thigh bone into the joint of the ankle.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if decay has already reached the ankle, then there is no remedy, and you let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of inserting the member or cutting it is that you strengthen the ligament in the part that you want to insert, and strengthen another ligament on the area; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts behind, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments at least one span wide so that all the flesh is discovered; and then insert or cut.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover it with a cloth of all parts so that it does not touch the area and that the patient's injury and abscess are adjusted and cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If the patient has bleeding when working, then you should cauterize the area constantly, or place some restricting powders on the wound; and then return to your medical practice before it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place the injured member in a suitable bandage, and cure that before it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And you should also recommend to that man who has such an accident in his foot, the same method that you and I have recommended, which is an accident that occurs to the black person in his foot due to overheating that is similar to burning by fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurs within his own foot before it spreads throughout the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for such an accident so that the cure would not arrive at the member due to the intensity of the pain and the burning of it, and he did not inscribe that foot into the joint, and it was healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, such an accident occurs in the same way on the same foot of the same person.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then he came to me, and I felt the need to expel that excess liquid that was on the surface of the medicine, approaching the purification of his body; and if it is not expelled, it starts to go into the other part where it started on the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to incise the surface of his hand, but I did not want to do that out of fear of the repercussions of that excess liquid, and more because I feared the beginning of the incision on his hand might cause death, as the patient was already in a critical condition.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And then he left me, returned to his land, and it was reported to me that that man had prepared and incised the entire surface of his hand, and he was cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narrative except as an aid to understand that which is caused by this illness, and what it signifies, and how it should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the treatment of hernias and the quality of clisterization with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and it is broken and pierced, and the pus is drained from it, and the place where it was becomes like a vessel, and the code which is above it has subtiliat drap, and no corruption reaches the rear, and it does not press on the bone or the nerves or the ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	If the space is prolonged before the corruption reaches any member, it is then called a fistula and not a zuchem.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The cure for it is to insert the entire codex with its folds, and more so when it is thinned out and made with cloth, and to ensure that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the codex sticks and that the corruption has not been achieved due to previous consequences, and if there is a gap in the codex, then you treat it with a salve.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And if you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the brace that comes from the fat has a pleasant odor, then use the Egyptian salve which is made of oil and vinegar and equal parts of wine, and adjust them in a vessel, and cover them over the fire until the medicament becomes honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and salve the affected area, and strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine on for a period of twelve hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then remove that dirty cloth; and do this for several days until the wound is cleansed and the pus is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Some people boil the ash of willow in water, when this medicine is not present; and you take the ash of willow and put it on the water; and then colander that and boil that cloth until you confirm that the wound has closed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of the ash, then boil that cloth in water and honey and mix it with a third part of vinegar, and boil that cloth in honey mixed with vinegar, because honey cleans and heals, and it makes the wound stick together, and especially when there is an excess of stipulation and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this for several days and you confirm that the wound has healed, then boil that cloth in water that makes the flesh tender.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take some diaphoretic and dissolve that oily, stinging substance; or you clysterize that area with some medicines and other substances that have the properties to do so, which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the sinuses are narrow and cannot receive the clyster needle, then you gradually widen that area with a small file until it is wide enough, pausing in the caliber covered with Egyptian ointment or basilicon.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	Similarly, if the orifices are wide, then you add the lips of that area with sutures and leave it in the amount in which the clyster is added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifices of that area from which the intestine is raised to the parts above are elevated, then dry that area in the lowest part where it is in order for the intestine to pass through it again, because when the intestine is constricted in the sinus, the flesh will be in that place.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible to dry the sinus inside the lower environment of the second bone that you want, then prepare the limb for the procedure by removing the bandage in a natural way and ensuring that there is no cause of retention in the bandage.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidative medications that are placed on the sinus appropriately for that part where you want to extend them over a cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	The cloth should be of such an amount that it covers the entire sinus; and then insert the forceps in the right side of the opening of the sinus, a wider one than the opening of the sinus; and then extend on another cloth from the feet according to the amount of the wound, and place it over the other cloth for a long position of the opening of the sinus so that the excrement is not retained in the bandage but only slightly away from it.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	The one that is over the opening of the sinus should remain in place throughout the hour so that what is adjusted on the bandage does not come out.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if what comes out of it from the arm is much or little, whether it is digested or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And if you consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And if your treatment is prolonged in this way, and you see that the matter that flows over the orifices of the sinus has adhered, or if it has not adhered, then remove it on the first or third day, and when you remove the plague, change the cloth and renew the poultice.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the sinus approaches the space and subtle viruses are found, do not despair of its adherence, because the healing of it will take place, because in some people in which the generation of meat in those plagues takes a long time, and from those in which it is done the opposite of that.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinus approaches the arm in an undigested way for several days, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and this is the cause of a prolonged treatment, then adjust the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as soon as they are adjusted to remove excess humidity.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most common cure for that part is to take a certain type of fat and dissolve it in rose oil, and place it on the affected area as if it were its own substance, and then comfort that part with that oil.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it is similar in that action, when there is no bone, certain fat, when it is thickened inside, and use of that; or take lard and aloe and grind them together, and sprinkle all of that over the melted fat when it is on top of the fire, and then place a cloth over that and strengthen that over the wound; and sprinkle the same fat that you have thickened inside over a cloth and strengthen that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some of them are administered with the long and expensive lily (and it is the celestial lily) and rice flour and centaury, and use those simple herbs or adjust them, grind and powder over the fat that I have recommended; and use that.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the wound is prolonged and does not heal with this cure, then you know that the corruption is in its base, and it makes an investigation in the bones or in other hard members or in the ligaments; then you cure it with the fistular cure as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the treatment of broken nails and toes, and the addition of cutting a finger, and the section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Apostema is an abscess that occurs under the nail of the toe or foot, and if it becomes prolonged and its treatment is highly valued, it is a cautious abscess, or it is corrupted, and if it is not treated in time, it will spread to the bone, and if it spreads to the bone, it will cause a foul odor, and the end of that toe will be black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have that same thing that we mentioned in the division and do not complete your treatment, then cut away all the excess that remains from the nail and then cauterize the wound with a pointed cautery, because the pointed cautery is helpful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is healed and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already begun to grow together with the flesh at the parts where they were separated, and they begin to pungent and the wound has healed that way, then cut a thin piece of skin from under the angle of the nail that punges the flesh, and push it into the wound, and cut that flesh with ease, and place something over it that was used in medicines to burn corrosively until it is all removed; and then cure that wound.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the bone is already corrupted, you must insert the bone and remove it, for there is no time to heal when the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and decay have reached that point, you must insert it into one of the empty spaces according to its memory, and cure it while it is healing.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the nail is broken or lost, and the pain is severe, you must begin by cleaning the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp transverse cut above where the nail was, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh that is under the nail, for you will cause severe pain to the patient, and may cause excessive bleeding in the area; and cure that location with this.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	This is not adjusted, which is common in the bones of many men, but it is fleshy all over, and it is often found in the bones, or it is in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	If the patient's joints are not in their natural position, or if they are born with abnormal joints of the aforementioned type.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	Those born with abnormal joints do not suffer, but those born with very weak joints are unfortunate.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are not fleshy, the section is lighter, and you should incise that part of their joints with a narrow space.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	It is difficult to cure those born with abnormal joints; therefore, be careful of their incision.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	It is better to incise the flesh of those born with abnormal joints at the beginning, around the bone, and then use one of those suitable files, and cure that before it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	It is better to remove the consolidation that occurs in those born with abnormal joints between their bones or by birth of the man who was not born, or by consolidation of plague or by burning of fire, or by similar things, therefore be careful to remove that consolidation before they return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place their clothes between them, which are soaked in warm oil to prevent them from becoming stiff, and separate them with this, or place a thin layer of plaster between them according to what is appropriate.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly, if the stiffness occurs in the palm of the hand, then dry that stiffness according to what is prepared and suitable for the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	At the beginning of the fingers, they are swollen.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	The fingers are swollen, and their veins are thick and full of melancholic superfluities, which come from the members of the body, and the most common occurrence of them is in the chest, and especially in the chest of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, you should administer bowel cleansing of the body of black cholera some strong purges, and then draw blood from the patient's great vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure of them is done by two methods: the first is that it be incised and that that black blood be let out, and the other method is that the vein be raised and all the blood be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The second part of this procedure is as follows: first, apply a cloth soaked in warm water to the abdomen to soften any hard or thick parts of the intestine, then gently lift the patient's bed to the highest possible position, and secure it with a belt around the waist, just below the ribs. Then, dry the vein in one, two, or three wide sections, and elevate the black intestine above the patient's chest, and then lower it back down, until the desired amount of intestine has been removed, which the patient can tolerate without discomfort.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then, leave that and command the patient to abstain from foods that cause black bile to be generated.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the treatment by tapping on the abdomen when the veins are full and the patient feels pain.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The second way of raising the bed is as follows: if there are moisture spots on the patient's abdomen, wipe them off and apply a warm cloth to the abdomen until it becomes red and the veins are exuded; or if you do not have a cloth at hand, until the limb becomes scalded.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the cord on the right side of the vein for sectioning in the long or back of the leg, or at the bottom of the leg, you must use the denolette, or at the lowest part of the leg, you must use the talc.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then lift the cord with scissors and excoriate the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch, and you must apply the appropriate remedy for that which sometimes presents as black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then when you remove the cord, you will sometimes find a white thread-like cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place your finger under that which is elevated and rotated from the cord, and suspend it with scissors open.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another section close to that section for three times, and then excoriate the cord from the part above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then lift that and insert it into the back section with the talc, and then extract it and lift it inside where it is next to the second section, and then extract it from the section above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do that before removing the outer layer that is the most recent or the most distant from all the sections, until everything is removed; and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to extract and elevate, then insert a double-edged sharp needle and tie it there and remove it, or insert behind it the ray and rotate your hand at every part until it is cut through.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not inserted; because if it is broken, it is difficult to elevate that part and it comes over the patient for that harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when that part is completely removed, then place it over the wound covered with wool soaked in wine and oil and not oiled, and heal it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the wound is twisted having winding that should be wrapped around the parts, and not straight as we have said, then cover that you cut over it at every part of winding of it and the places of wrapping of it, and suspend it from a hook inside until you elevate it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to puncture the vein and not to press too hard on that area, as it is difficult to lift that part; use your discretion in that matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision made when the vein is cut open:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of a nail or pin:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be sharp like the nails or pins, but rather blunt to avoid puncturing the vein; it should be made of a flexible lion's claw, as if it were too thin, it would puncture the vein due to its thinness; having too much thickness there is what we have mentioned.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the hollows on dry lands like those of the Ategi in Arabian lands and in the dry and barren lands of India where there is little vegetation and in which there is no grass or herbs.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also generated in other parts of the body, not just the hollows.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the process of its putrefaction is that it leaves behind a tail-like structure like the venom of snakes, worms, and other creatures that breed between the intestine and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And in the event of the occurrence of this venous inflammation, which is very intense on the chest; and then the place is incised; and then the vein is carefully removed from that incision, which seems reasonable to do.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then, when it appears that you have reached the end of it, then cover the area with a poultice made from the powder of a dragon's tooth, about one dragon's tooth, and tie it there and leave the poultice suspended from the chest.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you find any cause for it in the parts affected, cover that with the poultice and tie it there.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and cover it with the remaining poultice; and do not incise that which seems reasonable until it is completely out, because if you incise that, it contracts and goes into the flesh and causes an abscess and pus in the place and ulcer in the wound.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it is treated carefully and removed bit by bit, until it is completely out of the back of it and there remains no cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And in some men, this vein extends along the length of their arm, from the palm to the elbow, and I have found that it reaches up to about 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised during their treatment, then insert the ray into the wound of the patient and pierce through the long tunnel to the body, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the location with medicines; and cure that by the cure of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein has caused some pain, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes out with some orifices, and it extends from which orifice.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And then cure that as we have said in the division and with that which is above mentioned.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of section of worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is not called in any land the bovine sickness because it is caused by many worms that are between the skin and flesh, and it is very rare, and it appears in all the body, and it descends and ascends, and it is shown at the feeling of the same member from member until it disrupts the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of it is due to the putrefaction of some humors, such as worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its maliciousness, because when it enters the body and ascends to the head, it reaches the brain, and then a strong fever comes into it and enters and destroys the brain, and this causes convulsions.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, it is not done unless you first examine its appearance and location on the sensation, and then be careful of what is above it and what is below it in its likeness and construction, and then dry it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is found in the flesh and not on the skin, then you place a pointed cautery with fire over the location where it is, and the greatest fear is corruption of it which corrupts the location as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see that it has reached the head before the brain, then strengthen above the temple with a strong structure, and then dry it and extract that; and be careful that the patient uses medicines that evacuate bad humors which cause putridity in their body, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	When performing a surgical incision due to pain,
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is not named in our land, but it is pain that occurs in various body members, and it is transmitted from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	I have already seen the second one that I will tell you about.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	He was called to a sick woman in a village, and she discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, which had been there for an hour, but it seemed to be moving like worms at this time, more likely than not that it was so, as if it were live silver when moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain of that place and it settled in the muscle, and it stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it corrected itself in the other body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then it recommended itself to me that it was turning around in the whole body, and it was too wonderful about its change and the speed of member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	I have already seen that happening in the second month of pregnancy, but I have also seen other symptoms that cause pain to be exchanged from one part of the body to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I have not seen that happening in women's thighs as well.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was that, but rather because the woman was old, with dry skin and exposed veins, and in this case the sensation of that exchange was felt.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this does not appear in those who are delicate and have a body with constricted veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And as you wish to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, do not appear at that place with the hand as we have said, but strengthen it over that and gently press on it until it is inside where that sensation is covered and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see that in the thighs, then cure that excusion of the body and that which expels that sensation, and give those who are foul-smelling and those who are made of serapee and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of extracting teeth.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sagetas are diverse according to their species, and according to the parts of the body in which they are found, due to their diversity; some have large points, small ones, concave ones, and deaf ones, which are solid; and some have three angles, and some have tongues; and some are astelas.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the tooth that is according to the members and the feet in which it is found has two methods: for the main members or principal causes, such as the brain, heart, lung, liver, kidneys, and gallbladder, and similar ones; and when pain occurs in any of these members and appears to you as a sign of death, the cause of which you should recognize appropriately, then cover that tooth in those places where death is more likely to occur in the major dispositions, and when these symptoms do not appear to you, and the tooth is not hidden deep in the member, then extract that tooth and treat the pain.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When the spleen of the servant is catheterized, it passes through the bone, and emerges from the cyphac which is above the brain, causing severe symptoms such as scotoma, vertigo, pain in the temples, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms, and confusion of understanding and vomiting of anger, and the word is abscinded and the voice is destroyed, and it emerges from the place of the humid white plague resembling pollen, and eyes like the consistency of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if this spleen appears to you in this way, then you must stop the treatment and extraction of the catheter, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the spleen of the heart is catheterized, it is close to the right breast, and it feels like a hard cause, not a soft one; and the movement of the spleen is similar to the movement of the polls, and comes from the black plague, and that freezing of the extremities, and sudden sweating, and syncope; and therefore you know that death is approaching.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the lungs are completely filled with frothy blood from the wound, and the veins that come from the neck become swollen, and the patient's color changes, and they breathe heavily and quickly, and demand air frequently.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the sword is in the cloth that is on the chest, and the pain is near the ribs, and it causes a great sharp pain and a loud cry, and does not affect all the member of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the sword is in the stomach, then there is a strong yellowish discharge of blood from the wound, and some undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the sword is in the abdomen, and it gets stuck in it, some blood or cloth or intestine that is torn, and there is no hope of healing without extracting the sword.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the sword is in the bladder, and it pierces the urine, and causes some abnormality in the parts, and there is a great deal of pain on the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	When the other members are like the face, neck, shoulder, back, ribs, and breastbone, and the sternum, and the spine, and the bed, and similar to the limbs, they are saved according to the major dispositions when the surgeon does not find vein or artery and is not venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	I would recommend this to you who have seen the work of these surgeons, so that you know how to treat such cases.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is that in a man who has this surgeon in the lacrimal duct of his eye in the nose, and I extracted it from the other part, after the gray matter of his brain, and he was healed, and did not cause harm to his brain.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another surgeon from a Jew who had this in his brain gray matter, after the eyelid pushed down, and the surgeon was already hidden and could not be removed from that but a small extension attached to his head, and it was a great cause of the sharp surgeries of the Turks, like a lion in which there were no brain.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And if it is not the case of the Justinian plague, and there is no such accident in his own home.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And they extracted another secretion from a man named Crestian, who was shot in the galley, and it was an Arabic secretion, and they placed it on that between two guides, and it was already submerged in the galley of him; and then they subtly applied that, and then they extracted that, and healed the Crestian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And they extracted another secretion from a man who was shot in his own belly, and they thought that he died because of that; and then, after it had passed thirty days and there was no change on him due to his conditions, they placed it on the secretion and covered it over, and he was healed, and there was no accident to him from that illness.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And they saw another man in whom a secretion was shot into the back of him, and it had consolidated the plague on him, and after seven years, the secretion had dried up in the middle of the wound.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And a woman was seen who had a tumor in her belly, and the plague was consolidated within it, and was not moved in her positions, and the woman did not suffer from some of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And another man was seen who had a tumor on his face, and the plague was consolidated there, and the tumor moved, but did not cause much pain, similar to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And the tumor was extracted from the man's nose, which was located in the middle of his face and had already declined to the left side, and the entire tumor was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to treat it within three days after the extraction of the tumor.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I again felt the pain of the tumor sharply; and then I inquired of that woman who was subtle, and she did not feel it; but he felt a point on the right side, and then I suspected that that point was at the end of the tumor.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply a poultice in the place that has attractive and digestive virtues, so that I can see the place of the wound, to dry it out.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not accidentally harm the significant part of the wound; and continue applying the poultice to it for several days without causing any accident; and while consolidating the wound, also observe the patient's general condition over several days until the day when the wound is healed inside and you report that to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then apply acute and corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it is opened, and use the tent to cover that, and again apply the fine tip of the needle to the edge of the wound, which adheres to the skin.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then adjust the opening of the wound for that acute medicine until I can see the edge of the wound, and pass it to me periodically for the next four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then when the wound is enlarged enough, and it is possible for me to introduce forceps into it, and continue with that, and do not neglect to examine it, you should not cease to carefully observe and engineer over it using various instruments, until one day you can hold the wound open with forceps descended from the top of the capitulum, as soon as its shape appears in the form of those in the end of the chapter, until it is extracted; and then restore that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and if it is restored, the wound is consolidated, and the patient is healed entirely, and there is no harm in any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some herbs for which you can apply that rule and meaning to that which I have not mentioned, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by narration or do not understand those freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the craftsmen know how to compare with few words; and they know what is present where it is absent; and they must learn new operations and new tools when external causes of the art occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that herbs are not removed from the members in which they are stuck but by two methods: either by attraction of the place where they are inserted; or by the opposite of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is removed by the place where it is inserted, or herbs proceeding in fleshly places, and it is attracted and removed.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not obey the instructions of the hour in which the cat is present, then wait for several days until the flesh that is around it rots, and relieve the attraction of the cat and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is stuck in the bone and you do not obey your instructions, then wait for several days and apply an attraction and moisture to it every day, and it will eventually be removed.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey your instructions in the proper time, then wait for several days and drill a small drill through the entire part of that bone until the location is widened by the saw, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the saw is stuck in the bone of the head and has already passed through one of the intestines of the brain, and it appears in the patient with those accidents that I have mentioned, then refrain from extracting the saw and wait for several days until its condition is equalized; because if the saw reaches the cerebrum, then death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the spear does not stay in the body of the bone only and does not pass through the chest, and the patient is able to breathe without any accident caused by those injuries, then you should engage in the extraction of the spear and the healing of the patient.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	However, if it is necessary to leave it and does not obey your extraction, then you should administer trepanation around the spear as we have recommended, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	However, if the spear is already buried in the body and is hidden from feeling, then you should inquire about that part, and if you feel it, then you should shoot that part with appropriate arrows for the extraction of the patient.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	However, if you cannot reach the patient due to the obstruction of the wound and its length, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins, then you should perform an incision on the wound until it is enlarged and possible to extract the spear.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have the golden keys that should be held, then remove the flesh in which it is stuck from all parts and cut away everything that can be done; and work on that, if you cannot on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the golden keys and in torsion of those entrapped inside.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the safest in each place where it is, then use your hand with forceps to all parts that make up that obstruction; and subtly work on the detail that the safest is not broken and that it is made according to your difficult approach to it and from that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot on your own, then leave for several days in which the parts that are inside it can be scanned, and repeat that which is usually done.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you have a contrary flow of blood, then administer what we have said about the cure in its capital.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your skill in the beginning of the vein or nerve, or of the cord, and administer engine in all possible ways of the evasion of the safest; and do that with facility and tranquility and delay and firmness as if you were doing it yourself and to your recommendation.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore you should make the sawing motion to bring the patient back to their original figure, according to the shape in which you must cut the saw in order to do so, as it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	However, if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	However, if the saws are not in good condition, or have been used on other parts, or make the exterior of the saw rough due to the part above the proposed handle and sometimes that part; then you should smooth it over; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then draw it away, as it is made lighter by doing so.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	However, if it is held in the bone, then twist the blade according to the opposite direction before the saw enters the bone, and widen it as you insert it, and then remove it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for a while, and then insert it when it is possible.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the wisdom tooth is in that position, then you should remove it from there.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the tooth has fallen out and you wish to administer an injection, then insert it into that place, if it is deaf, use a syringe to inject the medication into the concavity of the tooth and its root.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the tooth is hollow, then strongly insert the injection into that place, as the tooth is held by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the tooth is poisoned, then carefully remove all the flesh in which it is located, if possible, and then treat that with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the tooth is stuck in the chest, or abdomen, or bladder, or side, and is close to where you touch that with the tent, and if it is possible to cut over that, then cut over that and be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, and then remove it, and after removing it, apply the appropriate remedy as soon as possible, and treat that before it becomes healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps used for grasping the fetus:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	With their pointed ends shaped like a beak, which are made like a vice when placed on the fetus to prevent it from being released:
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those, special types of forceps are made, large, small, and flexible, according to the amount of the fetus's size, and its flexibility, and the width of the wound, and its construction:
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of concave hook at the end of this extremity, shaped like a beak, to facilitate the introduction of the instrument into the wound, and to push away that deaf one:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of pushing away the deaf extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	shaped like a ray to facilitate the introduction of the instrument into the wound and to push it away:
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of vein puncture.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy, of which there are sixteen in the head, two temporal arteries that are called temples; two herbs that are on the two temples; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two eyelids that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is in the tip of the nose; and two arteries that are at the collar; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	May the veins that are punctured in the arms be visible; one of them is cephalic, and it is called wild thistle; the people call it "the head vein", and it is deaf, and it is a migratory vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that vein to the people "vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein that is paused in the domestic thigh, and it is called "citillar", and they name that one to the common people "vein of the belly"; and the brachial vein, and it is paused over the hearth, and it is the vein in which it is punctured, and it is the vein that appears on the foot for apparent manifestation; and the saphenous vein, and it is the vein that is between the inner ear and the smallest called, and it is in the two grooves.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the thigh there are three veins; one of them is located behind the curve of the wild thistle of the thigh; the second is saphenous, and its location is behind the thigh domestic; and the sciatic vein, and its location is behind the wild thistle of the thigh; and in the thigh there are other similar veins.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The swelling of the veins that are close to the ears is due to ancient and recent catarrhs, seizures, and old wounds on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of these is as follows: it is to shave the patient's head, and to rub the patient's head on the occipital bone in the location where the veins are wide with good friction; then strengthen the patient by placing a band around the neck where the two veins appear and their locations are close to the ears; and if you feel pain in those places, here is a remedy for that.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the cutting lancet, and that which is sharp, and insert it behind the vein in the hollow of the elbow where the elbow joint comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand with the vein and elbow above and insert the lancet into the vein at the beginning of the incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be approximately twice the width or about that; and make it as deep as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then apply strength to the powders and leave them inside where it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already at the beginning of the book, I have indicated the beginning of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	May the two arteries and veins that are at the temples be the ancient and bad and constant and source of excessive and sharp fluids poured into the wounds.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of fleubotomar those is second that I recommend to you: strengthen the patient with the mallet where the two veins appear at the sensation by manifest appreciation and demonstrate their legs behind your own; and then you will see if it works.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you will raise the cord above the vein at the parts indicated by you, and introduce the fleubotomi behind, and raise the vein up; and insert that as you have done in the other two veins; and make it bleed according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then remove the bandage of the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place it on that cot and powders and strengthen that above with strong constraint, and leave them inside where it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And they have already made their memoranda, and of those who were present, and at the beginning of the free text.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the advantage of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is to approach the phlebotomy of the cephalic to the ancient maladies of the face and to emigrant and ulcerous fetid sores.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of that phlebotomy is as I have recommended to you; so it is that the patient should strengthen their neck with a band where the vein appears; and then take the instrument called the fossor, which is of this form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the puncta eminent on the top of the fossor above that vein and strike it with the other hand in the manner of the instrument, and let the blood run according to the amount you want; and then remove the puncture from the patient and strengthen that area where it was healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some veins are opened with lateral phlebotomy, however do not let the phlebotomy be of acute extremity as with other phlebotomies, but rather on the front side, and perform the phlebotomy according to the transverse line, where the bone is prop and very strong to cut into it when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the swelling of the two veins that are near the lacrimal glands of both eyes due to scalding and irritation in the eyes, and in facial diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the tracheotomy is that the patient strongly bends their neck forward, and then perform a tracheotomy on them, and you should be standing over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And if the tracheotomy is made along the transverse direction a little bit to the side where there is no flesh; and if the incision of the tracheotomy is thin, then the end of it is cut off.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then run cold water over them as much as is necessary, and place your hand on those wounds, and stretch them with a new cloth, and then remove those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the tracheotomy of the nasal vein be compared to acute fever and violent soda, and in facial diseases and migraines and irritation that occur on the face, and especially when it is ancient.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the lumbar puncture of him is that the patient bends his neck and approaches his own nose with your left hand, and takes the fine needle long and puts it in the lower middle part of the back of the second straight direction, because the vein does not appear to the feeling here, and because the spine begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	And you gradually move your hand with the lumbar puncture needle according to your need; and place it on a new site, because that is restored more effectively.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The onset of lumbar puncture in the case of meningitis and leprosy and other diseases and inflammations and malignant ulcers with herpes is as follows:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the lumbar puncture in those cases is that the patient bends his neck and approaches his own chin with his hand; and the surgeon is on the head of the patient, and the patient is lying on a mattress.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Approach the vein with a small forceps, gradually opening it from the long side; then extract the blood in small amounts as needed or as much as necessary; and do the same with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then remove the bandage and tightly tie both veins with a strip of cloth to prevent the patient from being frightened, and leave it in place until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The use of bloodletting from veins can help to treat small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and fissures in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of bloodletting is that you should perform it on the patient, and tightly tie the collar of the vein with a band, and then rotate the lips of the vein and look for both veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the color of each of those, and that which is more black is in the circumference of those small black veins; and then incise each from the beginning.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you are unsure about something, and do not know which of those is correct, then examine the most prominent or obvious of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are above the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	If it is customary to cut those two veins that are below the lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	If those two veins below the tongue are bleeding heavily, then use the lancet of the cephalic vein at the forehead, to the patient's mouth, throat, uvula, and other parts of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of performing that procedure is to have your hand between the patient's legs, and raise their tongue, and look at the other side of the vein from each side, and the color of each is becoming darker.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then puncture each one; and be careful not to pierce your hand with that lancet, because those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are punctured in the groin are those in which blood flows in all men, and the puncture of their veins is done in two ways, either they put a butterfly needle or an olive oil needle at an angle; or they cut the puncture with a scalpel, and call it a suture, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this suture is what is suitable for section and of those that are special in latitude and subtle according to the size of the veins and according to the tension of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of butterfly needle puncture:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	If the latitude of it is such as to be with times, and suitable for opening convex veins full proceeding from apparent thick ones, and those that contain thick blood clots.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of butterfly needle puncture:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this is the form of butterfly needle puncture with a smaller latitude and more subtle tip, and suitable for puncturing thin veins that contain thin blood clots.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the lubrication of the basilic vein, one of three veins: where it extracts the san from the patient's body and neck, and from there it enters the chest and stomach.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And remind the phlebotomist, when performing that phlebotomy, to be careful and have no fear in that place, where there is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will incise that artery and cause a flow of blood, so that he does not perform that phlebotomy without being careful and having no fear.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear due to its manifestation, then advise that you leave it and move to another, or surround some other part; or perform phlebotomy in the place of the end of the arm, where it is manifest, and cut it as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	May you also want the phlebotomy of the elbow, then advise the structure of the arm that you touch the place before you know the place of the forearms, and then cover your hand over it; and then bend the arm and cut the vein in a concave section as we have said; and be careful not to press too much on any part of the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you see, as you strengthen the ligament, inflammation in the place where you have placed your finger, that inflammation is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore it should be treated like that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the sinew flowing in the popliteal fossa as thin as a child's artery, and the sinew is very subtle, then you know that it is from the sinew of the artery; and then cover and press the wound with your hand for a long time; and remove the bandage, and if the sinew is cut, then you should strengthen your arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And guard the patient from the moccasin of their foot, and do not cause them too much fear until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the sinew is not cut, and you must not present medicine to it, then you should incise the artery if it appears to you; for its extremity is contracted, and the sinew is cut; or take a needle and make that, and take one thread and strengthen it over the place of the vein with stricture descent at the ligament and in the pulvils through the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the bone is abscised, it is good; and if not, then cure that part with the same method as previously mentioned for the removal of bone splinters.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The abscission of the bone from that part is difficult due to the small space of the wound and the possibility of the tendon of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the dark vein is used for the trephination, it is very useful to remove the bone from the upper part of the head and from the lower part of the body; this is composed of basilar and cephalic branches, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And advise the trephinator who is overly fearful of that trephination, which is near a nerve; and then he should adjust the puncture of the trephination and avoid the nerve, it will cause great pain, and it is difficult to cure that, and often it is not cured at all, And this nerve appears in sensation; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not shown, then advise him to place the trephination near the bone section of the skull, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then puncture the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of venipuncture of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and relieves the suffering of the headaches.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And to do this properly, if you want the venipuncture to be done with an olive or a nut; because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not touch the artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you must remember that the venipuncture should only be done by piercing the capillary around the area, and not touching it, and not knowing if it is at the first percussion prime that is on the same as the venipuncture some veins.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is very common for pus to form in some men, when it is not venipunctured at the first percussion, and if they do not know that pus is in that area.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of the venipuncture of that and its effects, in which you should think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first one is of the type of phlebotomy that is administered only for the sake of preserving health and for hope of it and for caution against the onset of diseases, and that phlebotomy should be done in one of the veins that are in the body, such as: cephalic, fusca, and basilic; and that phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of primevera, after breakfast in primevera and autumn, and in winter near the meal, when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be done on the third day or the first after three hours have passed since sunrise.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	More phlebotomy that is administered, more when convenience and necessity require it, either at night or during the day, at all hours and in all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And the type of person who should not be phlebotomized until they are fourteen years old, and women who should not be phlebotomized except in the fourth month before the seventh, and the elderly who have passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wants to be phlebotomized for some reason, let them take a lion's claw, and in those places where there is a small wound, hold it so that the veins do not release the superfluities into the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are pure, and do not delay the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not phlebotomize those who are suffering from sea sickness, drunkenness, or have escaped from illness or intoxication before that has passed from them, nor those who are suffering from hydropsy, and more that phlebotomy is feared for colic passion and vomit, and for stomach, and for multiplication of costiveness, work, and exercise of breakfasts or vigils, and for all cause that dissolves the virtue, whether it be corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And also consider in the subtilization of humors that if the blood is thick, take food and drink, and take medicine if it is possible to it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And if possible, enter into the wound and, unless something prevents it, exercise it in order that the sinew may be thinned.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And place the bandage on the chest of the day, around the time of the third hour, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And prick that chest of his so that it may be kept in that day from all animal misfortunes, as we have said, including anguish, irritation, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as labor and superfluous pain, and crying and similar things to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in his seat, make sure that the causes are present in the vessel of which customarily men have aromaticity and odor and balms and similar things according to their quantity.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the bandager on a cushion that is put or that of the one who should be bandedaged.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And if possible, extract his arm, and wipe that with the hand of the bandager or three times; and then tighten the bandage around it and wrap those three times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	When the stricture is cold and not equal, or when it is superfluous, then do not allow the flow of the san; or if it is a softening, then do not allow the heart of the san to be entirely.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then the stricture, cover that one who should be phlebotomized with his hands between their thighs where the veins are inflamed, and they are declared to the sense.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the phlebotomizer places his finger on a small amount of ancient oil properly; and then he places his hand over the vein on the side where the phlebotomy is to be done, so that the vein flows a small amount, and the percussion is set where the veins are located with the cord fugent from the phlebotomy, and those that are full of ventosity and when he pauses the phlebotomist over that one, he contradicts the phlebotomist, and the phlebotomist does not open the vein, and if he opens it, that one is strict.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for that reason, the flagellant should be stopped and solicited in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then, if the vein is pierced in a varicose vein, you should do so; but if not, repeat that procedure from another location nearby, or over the affected area, if the location is not too inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is inflamed, or the patient becomes frightened, then you should leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the bandage, because that would cause more inflammation or not enter into the wound.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then, if necessary, repeat the flagellation.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the puncture is small and corrected gently, and you fear that it will not be enough to get the desired amount, then repeat the flagellation in that area again, adjusting the bandage a little, and do that until the location is inflamed, because in some people, the location becomes inflamed after puncturing.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	If he has already developed a boil, do not touch him, for there may be some cause that does not allow you to; and place some part of the oil cloth over that part.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is best in this case to use oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, administer oil cloth in all phlebotomy, which veins pierce the prohibition of blood from the body, and do this by tying and bandaging when placed on that one of those over the area, for the wound is subtle and revolves when it is large.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the location of phlebotomy a large boil is generated, because of badly formed veins, and especially that one who has not been bled but only that vein, or in the insertion of the needle into the vein, and then you take it, and place a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen it for an hour, for it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And make sure that this is done near the end of the vein from that vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If you find any black or green color in the area, do not note it; and if you wish, place something over it to prevent it from being a cause of poison or mirrors dissolved, or any cause of suc de mentastre or of calament or a similar thing.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And move the swollen parts and abscesses that occur in the great sinus by lancing it.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand over that area, and if you find mollicia, place your compression over that area; then that elevation is bad and bad; and therefore guard yourself that you place something over that area to prevent it from being a cause of the blood flowing from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply an emplastrum to that area to prevent bleeding, so that the area is hardened, and then cure it with the other treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And cover that area with a bandage according to the amount of its power and according to the color of the blood that comes out, so that it is covered with the blood that appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the bone is black, then leave it inside until it is rotten; and similarly, if you see it swollen, then leave it inside until it is thinned out; and similarly, if it is sharp, then leave it inside until its sharpness is blunted.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if it is necessary to extract a bone in an emergency, then the phlebotomy of the vein should be amplified and the phlebotomist should be left-handed.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in those that are cold, do the opposite of what was done before, and if it is necessary to extract it in an emergency, then the path should be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best thing that is administered in phlebotomy of vein is that it should be a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy saves from bone flow and nerve injury, and it is more praised and safer than second-latitude and longitude phlebotomy.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in the case where a syncope occurs after phlebotomy, and if you cure it with a small dose of pinewood infusion or simple oximel, then extract it from the bone in three or four emergencies.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is complication of the complexity, then take a syringe and infuse into an eye-dropper of milk or an eye-dropper of honey-flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or an aromatic eye-dropper with a pleasant odor.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If the syringe breaks and you need to use it again, and the cause of its damage is the presence of a small amount of salt, then take some water of meat and a honey-flavored eye-dropper with a subtle odor; use an aromatic oil, and smear it on the patient's chest.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of syringes for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to move their arm and dissolve their second salt, take the syringe from which the eye-dropper is used for forced evacuation, and its virtue is free, which evacuates the small amount of salt gradually, according to the quantity of its virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	If one wants to perform surgery on their arm, and their second finger is bent, and their chest is strong, then do that procedure around seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	If one wants to draw out their chest bone towards the opposite side of the part where it inclines, then do that on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	If that chest in which the bone is already sore and sharp, and causes a high fever, then draw out that bone in a gradual way, and draw out a large amount of it, and amplify the opening until the fainting stops, so that you have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the side of the chest, to prevent death from fainting, which gradual extractions cause when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not do that when you want to dislodge the arm and evacuate the second bone extraction, as the orifice of the vein has already been closed and it is difficult to remove it from the bone, which would be harmful if you press too hard and bend it incorrectly, because that is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	When performing a procedure called bleeding through the vein; or remain with that sharpness of the bleeder which is coagulated from the blood into the opening of the vein; or pause over that of tyrannical algaroth, or sagzenea, and compress that with light pressure until the blood stops flowing.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary to evacuate the blood again, and there is no excuse, then sign that spot on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis del bras" is bled from the back or the base, when they are not hardened or hidden, which are composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of that bleeding is that the patient introduces their hand into warm water until the vein swells and appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then apply strength to that which is the ligament of the migratory stricture; and bleed again following the transverse line, not horizontally or lengthwise.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make your incision wide and use your flensing knife to remove the joint slightly.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the blood flow is prohibited, then you should immerse the hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your purpose.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you should excuse yourself from immersing the hand in warm water, and instead place a cloth on the back of the patient's neck in cold water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the incision of this vein is safer than all other veins, because it has not been previously pricked or punctured by a needle.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the incision of the patient's ankle is like that of a child.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of this incision is that you should stretch the hand or place it on a cloth, rather than immersing it in water, until the vein is inflamed and clearly visible; then make an incision across it; and if you do not see anything, repeat the process.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And do not let your hand touch the fleur-de-lis, which would expose the nerves of those disrobed parts to harm.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then repeat the hand in the lower part and let the blood flow into that, because if you do not repeat it in the lower part, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted according to the necessary amount, then you should place salt and oil on the vein, so that it does not solidify too much; and similarly, make sure you do everything in a straight manner.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The stain of the fleur-de-lis from your hand is like the diseases of the melon.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same with the fleur-de-lis as you did in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the stain of the vein from the fleur-de-lis is like the diseases that are in the part behind the belly, such as those of the mother, and retention of menstruation, and the diseases of the rats and ulcers of thighs and old joints, and their similarities to the diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the fleam used on him is that the patient inserts his own foot into hot water and makes incisions over that friction where the veins appear; and he ties the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the location of the vein he takes as a guide, and from there its branches spread out on the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then he uses the widest branch or behind the cushion, following the guide of the vein, which is best and most safe.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if he makes incisions on the surface of the foot, then you guard against the nerves that are located above the surface of the foot, and pause your fleam at the place where you would like to make the incision, as if you wanted to insert it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the fleam be silent.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the discharge of pus is prohibited, then you rub the foot of the patient in hot water and let the pus run out through that incision where it can be drained.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the fleam user errs in the first incision, then you rub the fleam on a small area, where the location is safe; and do not fear from him, but guard against the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, do the same thing on the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, it should be behind the heel and in front of the outer ankle joint.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the juice from the phlebotomy of that place is painful when it is poured out.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy at that place is that the patient lies down, and quickly and strongly presses the cushion under his leg from the side of the thigh to above the ankle, forming a long, subtle bend, which does not appear otherwise.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, you should phlebotomize that place with a needle at each possible angle and transversely, which is better; or insert the needle from the beginning or remove it from the end, because the location of that place is salty.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in men more common; and if you cannot phlebotomize that place, and it does not appear all at once, then phlebotomize some part of it, and that which appears on the back of the foot, near the auricular and annular.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and pour out the amount of blood that you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then remove the restriction and place your hand over the area of the wound, pressing strongly on the location where it is usually healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of the symptoms and qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Symptoms are of corn, or earwax, or vermin.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Symptoms are made in two ways: one is by incision and extraction of blood, and the other is by making incisions.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this symptom that is made by incision is done in two ways, either by fire or by fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the symptoms that are administered by incision and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body, of which the first one where they are placed is the neck, and the last part is the back; and the middle part is two parts of the collarbone; and symptoms below the jaw, after the mouth; and symptoms of two spatulas; and symptoms of an aesthesiometer, and it is on the top of the spine; and symptoms of two forceps, and they are from two bones; and symptoms of two chisels; and symptoms of two cushions.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	When the pus is not extracted from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason, the virtue is not obtained for those, as it is done by phlebotomy; nor is there any harm that pus should be made with fire or hot iron in some bad condition made for replacement before the whole body is completely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	However, if the pus is caused by illness or continuously, administer it in the entire hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at some time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	Which is the cause of why men in those who multiply pus within the time necessary for its extraction by ventozacio and atroba in their own head gravity and soda; and of those who atroba replacement and inflammation in their face and in their head, and in their neck; and of those who atroba prominently in their face and in their front and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and of those whose location of their pus is changed; and of those whose taste is multiplied; and of those who have sanc in their mouth, or that their tongue is apostemada and scrape sanc; and of those whose sleep is multiplied, and of those who vomit sanc in their sleep rogor and antics and plagues and other causes similar to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when in any of those cases, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth toe, then command a warm foot bath to be made after two or three hours have passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And it is important that the foot bath be given with the head elevated and at a level that allows for complete evacuation of the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this bath is in the location of the cephalic phlebotomy.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not good to use that one which is of complex preparation, or in which there is catarrh, as it gives great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore do not use those ones that are old, and in the tops of which there are illnesses festered.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And therefore it is important that the one who performs the bath places their hand at the parts behind, as to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	And the bath with alcohol is in the location of the phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilica: and therefore it gives relief from asthma, and from the contraction of the lungs, and the opening of the lung, and cough, and the repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And if the wind eggplant is not covered with a small cloth, if it is placed there, it causes weakness in the body and the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the wind eggplant gives rise to headaches, obtundation, photophobia, and pain in the teeth; it is a place for tracheotomy of the pharynx.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And if you command the wind eggplant operator not to prick his hand with a scalpel so that he does not puncture the artery and cause blood loss.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the wind eggplant in the mouth gives rise to alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar to those that are in the mouth, and it is a place for tracheotomy of the pharynx.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the wind eggplant that is made on the two spoons gives rise to caphtan, which is caused by the accumulation of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the wind eggplant of the two parts of the needles gives rise greatly to tracheotomy of three veins, which is from the pharynx, fusca and cephalica, because it draws out all the blood that is in the flesh, and those small veins of the other veins that are thicker than they reach the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the bleeder that he not proceed too much in the act of scarification, for the area is exposed to flesh, and leave there his nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And there is a bleeder who is bled over the buttocks and relieves the hemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcers behind.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you command the bleeder that he be a great bleeder, and that he be of iron, for the area requires strong section; and he should have thin and delicate veins, and be bled during the act of scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	May veins of the thighs be thinned by obvious minuicio, for they draw all the blood from the body, and relieve old pains of the joints and of the loins, and of the bladder; and provoke menstruation, and relieve constipation and diarrhea; and stand in place of fleubotomia of two sophens, and alahorcoben, and of two cavilhas.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, if it weakens the whole body and causes syncope in men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	When the patient's breathing becomes shallow, it is recommended to place two cushions under their arms.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the arms is that they are placed in a way that allows them to be slightly elevated and cooled by a moderate breeze, and do not prolong this position, but rather change it often, and keep them comfortable, so that the humors can flow into the body.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	Do not stop repeating this until you see that the affected area has become red and swollen, and the signs of infection appear.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you should gradually scarify and repeat this process little by little, and also consider the position of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that person who has thin skin, it is recommended to scarify only once and not repeatedly, so that the affected area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the fan to blow on the scarified area and gently fan it, making the process easier.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the infection has become severe, then it is recommended to scarify twice, because in the first scarification, the pathway for drainage and the moisture of the affected area are opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second, during the examination acquired from the extraction of the large stone.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the stone is foul, then make a superficial incision in the clean part to allow it to pass.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract a small one by one or a small one, we need a superficial incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a large stone, make a large incision; and if we know that the stone is very large, then make a preliminary incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term for incision is the depth of the wound.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the wound is large, thick, dark, and its pores are straight, then make the incisions of the blisters more gentle, more open, and more resolved; if it is in summer time, use olive oil of aloe or olive oil of violat, or oil of amellas dossas, or oil of cement of coja; and if it is in winter time, then use olive oil of narcissus, or olive oil of lily, or olive oil of camamilla, or of sand, and similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is large, then rub it with oil of marjoram, or oil of balm, or oil of aloe, or oil of aneth, and similar oils.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the wound is large because of thick flesh, then it is prohibited to use oil, and instead, for these locations of wounds, the wound should be washed with warm water or fresh water of salt, or warm water of cow's milk, or warm water of donkey's milk, and similar.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose wound is of thick moisture, wash the wounds with warm water of vinegar, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the one whose excesses are large, wash the wounds with warm water of vinegar, or water of pennyroyal, which is marjoram, or water of aneth, or camomile, and similar.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is recommended to keep the wound away from dirt; having them administered nearby the bath for an hour or two, and it is recommended to keep the wound near the bath.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is the reason for retaining blood from a person before a phlebotomy?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	If the person who is to be bled or the one who performs the phlebotomy is irritable and has a sharp and inflamed tongue, with symptoms such as mildew acidity, and sweet and sour taste, and dry mouth, and julep, and similar symptoms, then consider that they should take cooling causes, such as mildew acetose, and endive anise, and agrimony, and julep, and their similarities.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their meals such as pork, and meat of young geese, and cooked foods with sour taste, and their similarities.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And from the one whose complexion is cold, consider that they should take essence of almond, or essence of secanabin of semense, and sumac, and any fragrant herb between old and new; and that they should be advised to use little wine and food, and pause their meals of pork and cannabis, and pissers and small birds and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is recommended that on days of wind and flagellation, the food should be more than the meal.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is recommended that food be given to some men in the morning, with certain herbs, musk, or medicaments of musk, so that the main members are comforted and that the sickness is alleviated; and do not recommend that they take that scalfatz.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	The incisions that are made should be incisions that are placed on the legs, and over the fetus and podagra, and over the umbilicus, in the locations of the joints, and the great toe, because these members do not suffer incision on themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those but to draw out the sickness of the member, such as a moist bandage on the breast in illness of flux of sickness from the sickness of the nose; and use that which is to dissolve the moisture of the flesh inviscade of the member, such as a bandage over the belly and umbilicus; because that rarefies the member and scalps it and ramifies the pain that resolves the moisture.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	When pain occurs in the joints due to inflammation or swelling, a strong attraction force can help reduce the inflammation and remove the swelling from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	Similarly, when it is placed on the leg and foot, it helps to relieve the swelling in those areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These relieving measures are administered only with succession; and some are administered with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered full of warm water in the afflicted areas of the foot.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	This is to ensure that the relieving measure is full and large, using warm water alone or water in which certain herbs have been boiled that are suitable for it.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	A relieving measure administered with heat: the width of the opening of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the remedy should be the thickness of a palm; and it should be on the side of the affected area, in the location that is within the circle, the most of it, the track should be small according to the amount that enters into it, an needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Make a pad or cushion of wool or citrus, with thick edges, lion, equal and smooth, so that it does not press the member in its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And place it at the side of the patient's body, where a candle is placed near the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this large cloth is much better than that one we recommended; and the smaller one, according to the patient's illness and condition.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cloths for children and weak people are different from those for young people and large bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this cloth on the member is that it extends the melted wax from a candle, and place it on the side of the transverse line in the middle of the cloth, so that the fire is lit around the part to be treated without burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And place it on the patient's member, and the doctor says so on the throat that we mentioned, until when they have the cloths and do not need to open the mouth and let the steam over that throat, then the cloth will be dissolved soon.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then apply the second instrument according to its method, and repeat that one if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In a syringe that is administered in the patient's bed of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse or horizontal line, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this syringe, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in any member but in the members in which it is impossible to position syringes, such as teeth and similar ones; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the nose and similar ones.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting instruments that are in the waters of polluted streams.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then lay them down in water until they are famished, and that there is no cause in the belly of those; and then evacuate the body with the flannel and syringes; and then wash the member of the patient before it becomes red; and then place them on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and cased.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to see the area with a wind instrument, it is better to do so from behind.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with warm water and a mottled cloth; and wipe and extract it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body is prolonged from the wound to the cavity of the bleeding vessels, and that water is drained, then place a cloth soaked in cold water under the area where the drainage is located.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the wound is multiplied, then powder over it with vitriol trisulfate, or with similar substances according to the causes of styptics, until the wound is stopped; or place the most dried beans on the area and leave them there until the beans stick to the wound, and then the wound is stopped.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repeated bleeding of the vessels, when it is possible to change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the vessels are prohibited from suspension, then wipe the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the places where blood can be found; and place them there, so that those vessels that have some blood soon stop bleeding.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to pass, powder some triangular aloes, or salt, or ash on those areas, and they will soon pass.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Here begins the section of the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh child, know that many foolish doctors and the common people and those who at some time will not regard the books of the Ancients or read one letter of them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason this method of the sciences in our earth is hidden; and I do not have it and am obliged to it in some time from all; and I have not admitted anything that comes after, but by the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science of them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then direct yourself to experiment and study in the length of your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that concerns the greatest science and on which the best experiment was passed; so that it is opened to you others and relieved from the occupation of length; and it is opened in the end of opening; and it is shown in the end of declaration; and it is formed in it many forms of the instruments that are administered in that, as it is done by addition of declaration, as it has been done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter One.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections on the breakage of bones, from those that are necessary to mention before we begin the memory of broken and different limbs of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us say in the introduction of this chapter the summaries of the speech; and the titles to which in the beginning are suitable for craftsmen and students, who know or learn this noble art besides you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	Therefore, let us say that when something happens to someone with a fracture or dislocation or twist or crush, then you should begin by examining the pulse or removing it, or whatever means, if no cause prevents, as in the case of debility of virtue, or is the one who has happened, or old age, or is time of great heat, or of great cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with seeing the signs of fresh herbs and of bird carcasses and of crabs; and prohibit thick meats and filling up with foods and of all food that fills the veins of sang, until you are sure of abscess caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their first usual state.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	Therefore, as the bone begins to be restored, it is customary for the patient to be fed nutritious food that is thick, heavy, and difficult to digest, such as bread made from wheat flour, water, rice, peas, cow's milk, cheese, and fresh pork, and similar foods, and this diet is made by coagulation of fracture more commonly and milk.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	You know that bones can heal in men who are in the prime of life and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature by the desiccation of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	They are consolidated and continued according to their nature for all time by the desiccation of those members, and they continue and are consolidated those that are from them at the end of the healing process, such as the bones of small animals.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	May however nature adjust and anoint over the broken bone of any part, in which it is often said that it grows and strengthens the one inside that is enveloped and connected together, through which the end is fortified and firm, like fire at the beginning, through which any cause does not prevent it from its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason, it is necessary to place the bandages on the patient's limbs, bandages in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	There is great variety of fracture according to the variety of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the types of fracture are different according to the variety of the limbs, for example the fracture of the bone of the chest is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and similarly, the fracture of the bone of the arm is different from the fracture of the bone of the shoulder; and likewise, all other members are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have remembered the remembrance of all types of fracture, explained in its separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Great diversity of fracture in this case.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	There are various types of bone fractures in their cases; some are caused by arcs, others by accidents in the stars; and some are longitudinal fractures: and some fractures of the skull and ribs and additions and non-additions, as is done when preparing to write, and a fracture with a great pain and disruption in the head, and a small fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each type, there is a specific pain in the restoration of it according to the memory that comes from its different locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Great severity of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	For that reason, bone fracture is known by its deformity, and by the swelling and tenderness of it to the touch, and by its location when it is felt at your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, if there is no deformity apparent in the location and it is not made by touching the bone in its movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that the tortuosity or small fissure does not allow you to place your hand on it and compress it entirely; place it over the medicine of which you remember the appropriate moment, which is suitable for the location; and keep it straight by a delicate constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	You should know that when the location is curved and does not split into two or another, such as it remains throughout the entire part of the body, then you should begin with your hand to rectify the situation where the abscess occurs.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if the abscess occurs, then leave it for several days until it ceases; and then apply an equal amount of each method of levitation and engagement that you can.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	You should know that the restoration of the location and its hardening is more important than the bone in which the abscess occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then apply the second method when the memory of it comes back.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the bone is affected, then it is necessary to extend this member torn in two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or if the member is small, then place your hand on it; or if there are two cords or one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And position your hand on the part of the body where you place the limb, while the parts of the body are extended from the limb, then pierce those attachments to return them to their proper places and according to each method that you can in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful not to injure the patient with your operation or its damages; and pierce according to your power that you apply one bone against the other as a companion according to the best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And be aware that at that time you touch your hand at that place, and if you see any different cause here, rectify that and equalize it according to the quantity of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as do foolish doctors who make movements that cause abscesses to occur through their operation, or cause contractions in the limb as we have seen through their foolish movements.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then attach, equal and proper operation and structure of that limb, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient about that and make him understand that it does not hurt him in the hour of his vigils and sleep, and see his rotation and agitation, and control all his movements throughout his entire skill; and wait until the position of the limb is a position where the pain is secure, which is why when feeling in the disposition of the position of the limb or its injury; then be aware that you replace that with another position of that where he does not feel pain; and guard against that so that the position of that limb is straight and equal, so that the limb does not suffer tortuosity when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the structure of the broken member is as I have recommended; because you know that broken members vary in their location, size, and shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small like the arm and the elbow and similar to those, it is customary to cover them with very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those that are larger like the cushion or the chest, cover them with a thick and durable cloth, because the lightness of the cloth strengthens the member greatly and holds it together equally, in such a way that there is no opening.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then, after you have started the evacuation of equilibrium, place a convenient bandage over that fracture with three or four layers as soon as the member is ready; and strengthen your hand slightly on the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then go to the most sunken part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen it so that your structure does not break the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then, with your tongue in the wrapping of the location of the fracture, slowly loosen the structure little by little, until you feel a large part of the location.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then, take another bandage and wrap the other wound over the location with the wrapping, and slowly remove the wrappings from the part of the location behind the fracture; and your operation in the structure of the wrapping and the softening of the second one that we have said in the first wrapping.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then, place your hand between the wrappings of the lion or cloth that is equal to the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is tortuosity in it; and if not, do not place your hand on it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then, place your hand on the other bandage, and gently press these sharp wrappings at first, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the location; and later, place your hand on that which secretes the abscess and which stops the inflammation; and leave it for several days; and then, strengthen on that.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And if the splints of the cane are made of this type, and well formed; or of wood; or of ramps of palm; and let the width of each splint be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the splint that is placed over that fracture should be thicker and narrower than the others, and the length of the splint according to what is placed on the member in magnitude and equality; and strengthen the other end with another band according to your first structure; and place a piece of cloth decently above it as we have said about the structure, and that your structure should be according to the location of the fracture, and the longer it is from the fracture, the looser the structure.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And the threads should be thick and thin in subtlety, and they should be made of silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of sewing up wounds with thick cords of silk, which is a great error when the structure is equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	It is not advisable to use very thin needles, because you will not be able to sew together those things that you want, and it will not be possible for there to be any space between each one.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is lying on the edges of the stirrups near the area where the sewing will be done, then place a layer of lion or lambskin over that area to prevent injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are difficult to treat, and disruptions in the spine can occur, and you will need to remember that in this case there is a special singularity in the second chapter of the capital.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that not all broken bones can be treated with stirrups on the first day; the reason for this is that the bone, when it is large, does not allow for resting on the stirrups for several days or even more, depending on your certainty of the risk of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the method of plasters used by the ancients to treat fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Handcrafted device like a bandage for the restoration of fractures, suitable for certain complexities and especially for women and children, where it is placed on the part that does not have heat or moisture: and you take powder from milled grain, and this is the medulla of the flour that should be mixed with the movement of the mill in the parts of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if it is like that, but you crimple that album of honey, and place the condition of the non-sharp or subtle; and then use it from there.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another device for the restoration of fractures and dislocations and twists: recipe of asafetida, of lavender, of acacia, of enula, and myrrh, which is made from one part of each ingredient, mixed with one drachm of aloe. x; one drachm of mirra and aloe. v; alochil drachm xx; all their crushed and crimpled and mixed with either alichil water or honey if the condition of the patient is scalded; and then use this device, which is of good composition and restores the broken bones more gently, and confers to most men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another remedy for fractures and sprains: Take equal parts of white marjoram, mint, aloe, and Armenian bole, 20 parts.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Grind all the ingredients in a large mortar with contraction, and their sieves, and their powders with water or egg white and administer it.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Remedy for separating joints and bones in those places, and for painful accidents in those areas and fractures: Take a piece of silk cloth and soak it in a mixture of vinegar and oil and place it on the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This remedy does not have the virtue of healing, but it can prevent and expel pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another remedy that heals broken bones: Take fig leaves and wild poppy flowers, grind them all and make a poultice from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Remedy for applying when healing a broken bone: Take equal parts of white marjoram, camomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of ers, and all the ingredients ground together, and apply it to the affected area if the limb is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is burned, then apply a wet cloth or a wet cloth made of it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another stronger plaster for quicker resolution than this first one, when dealing with a long-lasting abscess: take petals of althea and seeds of lime, balm, melissa, majorana, violet flowers, camomile, all parts equal; all should be boiled in water or wine or honey, all according to the quality of the member and its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May not use Hippocratic wine freely placed on the member to be restored, but rather make a wax seal with wax and oil, and not another cause; and recommend that it be done between roughness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May not use Gall wine placed on the member to be restored and its causes in which drying is small of heat as it has with mirra, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Grease for wound and pain relief: recipe equal parts of miguel, of ceze, of hair from an unshaved man or a feather from an owl, and aloe, and salt; crush them with a mortar and pestle, and make into a paste.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount should be adjusted according to the size of the wound and its location; consider whether it does not cause pain or inflammation, and if the bones are not broken, do not leave it for more than a few days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If pain, inflammation, or swelling occurs at the location, then remove it in that hour, and leave the paste on the wound.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a cloth and sea sponge of lion's mane moistened with water, and soak it in cold water; then wash the wound until the swelling subsides and the pain is eased; and leave the member to rest for an hour; and then place a woolen bandage moistened with warm vinegar and olive oil on the wound, and keep it there for a night until you are sure of preventing an abscess, and that the inflammation of the member subsides, and that the pain of the wound is relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then gradually apply that delicate structure and use a small, not too strong plaster for your first construction, and gently insert it where it is healing.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and pus and pain and inflammation and all the accidents have already disappeared from everywhere, and if you need plaster and structure, then gradually apply it as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no harm has occurred to the member from those that we have mentioned, then do not remove it for three or four or five or seven days; and some days all of this is left for twenty days after you appear by the removal of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and settles on the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust in the structure more than in your first structure, and adjust it according to the increase of the food of the patient, after the remembrance of him.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see that the location of the fracture has already dried up and become more extended than it should be, then know that the food is prohibited from reaching that; and therefore apply it with warm tepid water throughout the day that you removed it; and this is all three days; and the structure is added a little, and for this operation the food reaches the member, and it is healed more quickly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	When those who are called bone setters restore the fracture of a limb in another way when it is not restored to its original position, according to their opinion, and if it is restored according to its tortuosity, that is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if that were done correctly, it would increase the ancient ones in their freedom and they would harm that work.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	I have never seen anyone of them do that, so it is reasonable that they should not do that.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter two: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are varied, and their figures are different, and their causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by percussion of the space, and the percussion goes through the entire bone, which is located behind the bone, just as it does in the bone, and for that reason this species is called "ascial"; or the space enters a part of the bone and penetrates the flesh but does not pass the incision to the back of the bone; and this type of fracture is called "levatio absolute".
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the pain from these two fractures is great or little, and of fracture that is contrary or atricious; and the cause of it is percussion by a sharp object or a fall on stone, and similar circumstances.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is so deep that it approaches the periosteum which is on the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the pain from these two fractures is great or little.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of fracture that is bent in the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and for that reason this special fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this fracture that is made by a fall or by percussion of stone, and similar circumstances, which causes some fragment of the bone to be driven into the parts inside, and it happens in the concave place as it happened to the ribs when they were struck and their fragments entered into the parts inside.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This happens more in the bodies of humans, such as their skulls.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these special fractures are caused by falls from a height, like those that occur when stairs are separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you should remove everything from that location.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you should detect all these special fractures by examining them and the corruption of flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And a special kind of fracture is known by the way it is discovered on the bone, it is cleaned, and it is covered with a bandage, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider the symptoms of the patient at the beginning, and if you see by the symptoms that it means by manifest signs such as vomiting from colera, extension, loss of understanding, abscess of the throat, fainting, acute fever, and swelling of the glands and pain in those parts, and similar to those of the symptoms in the major dispositions, they are not cured.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see that the symptoms do not correspond to a cure, then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause of this is that if it has come to you in the place where it was originally and it is in the days of winter, then you should study in the position of the bone giving on the day of the fourteenth, all in disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then you should study in the position of the bone giving on the seventh day, having that which is left of the bone is corrupted by the panniculitis, and that accidents have occurred.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the panniculitis covering the brain, and it is small and thin, then you should study in the position of the cut and thin part, according to what I will recommend to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you raise the head of the patient lying down, and disclose over the bone according to custom and your ability, as much as possible according to the figure of the wound, and that it is lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if an accident occurs to you in the detection of the bone, flow of pus or abscess cautiously, then you should pause at the patient's am aquo that covers, and that you fill the place of cloths infused in vinegar and olive oil, and make a bandage over the wound until it is sedated the abscess, and be sure of flow of pus; and afterwards begin in the circumference of the bone and in the removal of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first method is that you insert the bone with a straight incisor, and this is the form of it: And then administer another incisor, slightly wider than the other; and this is the form of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer the wider incisor than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should have various incisors of different widths, some wider than others; and some shorter than the others and sharp at the ends of their extremities, and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease for percussion on the incisor so that it does not hurt the head and let that one go.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is hard, tough, then pierce it in its circumference where you administer the incisors with those called non-penetrating tartars.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And those are not called anything else but that they do not penetrate the end of the bone at that point where you approach it, so that the tartar has a rounded extremity or margin on that which is left behind the head similar to a margin or small circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the density of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient for you to take many of these needles that are suitable for the size of each bone, until it is in your present in all tests of the brain, the length and width of which should be according to the quantity of spirit in this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of needles: The quality to pierce in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the needle on the bone and rotate it along its length until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the needle to another location, and pause where the thickness of the ray or around that is.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert the thinnest possible needle between each crack of the bone, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause that has appeared at that point, such as delicate scissors and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be sure to guard against any cause that the scissors might touch the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so, when you have circled the bone perforation, and if it continues to be attached to the bone, and if you extract that, cover it with a material that is rough and uneven like the surface of the bone, but rather more smooth and subtle than other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there is any small part of the bones that are attached and stuck, then take that which you can from the instruments; and apply it to cure the wound with linen and find the ones we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is longer and more difficult, which Galen and Avicenna praise greatly; and this is the speech about it: it is necessary for you to begin by discovering the part of the bone in which the fracture is most severe and most obvious, before you have discovered that part and placed it behind the end of this slow and gentle scalpel, of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And that the lens-shaped part is lion and does not penetrate any cause, and the sharp part is of the same length as before; that the lens-shaped part should be adjusted to the bone at the surface of which the sharp part incides.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then, approach the incisor with a small sharp knife within which you insert the bone entirely as it is revolved, and you should be sure of the pericardium that it does not occur in the accident that you fear in any manner, and if the physician was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly,
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If any cause is attached to the pericardium in some places of the bone, then cut that one with the extremity of the incisor that lenticular, and release that one with facility, which is released from its harm and its fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the pericardium, and that which is abscised or stopped on the bone is the face of it, and it is in the roughness and subtle scratches, then cover that roughness and remove those scratches with razor-sharp knives which you have prepared for that purpose, of various quantities so that you can possibly administer them in all places the most convenient for them and the most direct of them second to that in which you lost your operation that bone was broken and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you should apply in your reason the medicine that you have used to thin those bones at the beginning, and then use it close to the most thin part of it, and do not cease to do so until you reach administering the thinnest of all those drugs.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In all other small bone fractures and thin fractures, apply the cure according to that which you used to correct it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is not caused by all those that have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And you should refer to what we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the bandage is removed when you remove the bone, then you should take cloth of the same amount as the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and soak it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first cloth and do this as gently as possible without causing pain; and then apply a broad bandage over it, but do not strain it except for the amount that the wound has, only enough to hold it together.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Let this person rest from this cure for a day or two until you are sure that the abscess has healed; and then remove it and administer medicines that increase moisture, such as linseed and flour of eggs, and powder of aloes and aristolochia, and similar things to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make these medicines into powder that is ground on the surface, if they are dry; and generally, administer all of this medicine of property that is to remove and not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard against the second that the wound in your cure is not contaminated; and it is not in the deafness of tongue or other; nor do you allow to add virulence to it; because when it is applied to the membrane of the brain, corrupts that and pores out that, and affects the patient with that evil malignity.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it affects the cerebrum, as from there the bone is formed and more when it is pressed in the cure of it, and it blackens on the surface of it; and therefore consider that if it affects the patient with the accidents that we have said, know that it is dangerous for him.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if no black magic is involved in the medicine that is placed above, and it is the power of that medicine that causes the black magic, then cover that part with melted honey and four parts of olive oil, and place a cloth on it, and rest that over the affected area; and then care for that with the appropriate remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You should know that the nose is not broken in two pieces, but rather in two parts, which are more solidly joined together, because there are two bones inside it, and the part that is left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, and it does not affect it except for its shape and curvature and flexibility.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts is broken, then cover that part with the smaller bone of the nose, and equalize that fracture with the other bone, and place it in its proper position, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this to help you, and be careful not to hurt the patient during your operation on the patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and it does not permit it to be seen, then cover it with a small swelling on the side where it is located.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the same thing.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And cover it with a bandage for the restoration of the patient on the first day after the fracture, if possible; and if not, then approach the seventh or tenth day to replace the bandage of the abscess cautiously.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and be careful not to block the nostril completely.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And say to the ancient restorers that the splints should be wrapped in bread, and moved around every day, but not seen by me; having covered the cloth with a piece of compacted powdered molasses; and then leave it until the bone is stopped and the cartilage is strengthened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Some splints should be inserted into the nose, in place of a plug, without any more cloth than a lion's mane; and if the fracture of the nose is very violent, do not prohibit the patient from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; and if you want to do it, do so, and if you want to, make plugs.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another splint accidentally causes an abscess, apply a plaster to the nose with cerate or a poultice made of warm water and rose oil, or with diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	However, if no abscess occurs, apply a plaster made of flour of starch and powder of calamine with egg white to the deformed part; and place it on top of the lion's mane, and do not leave the nose without any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	However, if the bones of the nose are fractured or broken, then cut over those, and remove those with instruments that are suitable for those; and place this opening, and heal it with what is suitable to consolidate, and with plasters that are suitable.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If there is pain in the nose, then apply a warm compress and administer medication through a nozzle into the nostril to treat it completely.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not painful, if the fracture is only slightly deformed and is not completely separated into two pieces and is curved to the parts inside, then it is likely to heal.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is in the middle, then insert your finger from the left side of the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right side, then insert your finger from the right side of the patient's mouth; and press that against the soft part of the fracture inside, with your other hand on the deformed part of the bone; and gradually equalize them.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw has already been separated into two pieces, then apply traction to the two parts in a straight line as much as possible to equalize them.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a disruption of teeth to the point of dislodgement, then use those that you hope will remain in place, such as gold or silver or cedar; and place them on the broken jaw, and place them on the doubled-up cloth, and place a large steady sheet of cloth, or a weight equal to the length of the jaw; and hold them above second by what you have prepared for the application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place the food of lion's blood on their wounds.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then take and remove it on the third day; and correct what has been altered from it and apply that with powder of mold, album of egg, or flour of cinnamon, so that you have already removed the plaster from it, and place a lion's wool on the application.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then with this annex and adjust that plaster on it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave that, until it is healed and strong the fracture; because this fracture is strict in three stages.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another event occurs, such as an abscess, then administer the same medicine that we have mentioned for other events during their recovery, and let that abscess remain.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is severe, consider whether the separated bone or fragments are displaced or not. If they are, then use the same instruments that are used for removing those from the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the openings of the wound are narrow, then enlarge them with a scalpel according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have replaced those fragments, and if any do not remain, then enlarge the openings of the wound if they are wide; otherwise, place one of the dressings that are suitable for this and cover it until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the shoulder when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The shoulder bone is often fractured at the part where it meets the arm, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When the bone is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts, other than those that do not require surgery; and it is easier to restore it; or if there are complications in the surgery, and it is difficult to restore it; or if the fracture is severe.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	In that case, the operation when the fracture is severe, is to have two assistants, so that one holds the assistant and follows the broken rib, and the other stretches the neck towards that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then level the fracture with the ribs until it is in the second form of the bone, and not in the eminence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if more extension is needed, then cover the patient's chest with cloth or wool, and make it according to the amount of your need; extend and elevate the rib and tie the bandage to your hand until the fracture is leveled as before.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot pull the tip of the scapula to the fractured parts, so that it reaches the front, then have the patient lie on their back, and place a large cushion under their neck.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant lifts the muscle of the patient to the fractured parts before the bone of the scapula is raised to its position in front, and then you straighten the fracture and equalize it with those called splints.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel pain in the scapula and its muscles, then have them removed to relieve that pain.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is stuck in the bone, then use one of the scissors that you have prepared for this purpose, after removing the scapula and the instrument that serves to break the bone; and this instrument is a hammer or an iron rod of which this is the shape of it:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a chisel of which this is the concavity; and its thickness should be according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the weakness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of the incision should be second to what is possible during the operation; there should be two endpoints, and one endpoint should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you have extracted the bone fragment is wide, and it is sure of infection, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear infection, then you fill the wound with gauze and powders according to the amount of the incision of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if infection occurs, then pour oil and rosewater on the gauze and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the structure of the bone when it is cut and separated be that you place a poultice made of flour of molasses and album of egg on it, and place it over the top of the lion's tail, and then place the sphere behind the tip of the bone, if necessary, and then take humidified cotton, which is long and as wide as the palm or about that; and then place powdered duplicates on the top and the poultice; and then take a thin tablecloth of the kind whose width is three fingers and in length similarly; and then wrap that in cloth, and then place that cloth with the tablecloth over the location of the fracture; and then take humidified cotton there as it revolves, and revolve it on the back of the bone and behind the tip of the patient's foot, and reduce it to all parts, and when the structure of the fracture is covered, and that is what is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And even if the bone above the broken one is not fractured; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the ligaments are softened or you see that the bone has healed, then you should straighten it and strengthen the joint.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and place a small cushion under their neck to support their head; so that the assistant can raise the bone of their clavicle to the level of the muscle; or hold their arm against their chest.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not dislocate it unless an abscess occurs in the place prematurely or after twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the bandage if you have seen the wound at that place, and adjust it in the stricture and restore it; leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the clavicle has coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and in some cases, it is done in the middle of that time for some people.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of a broken shoulder joint.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A wooden spatula is broken in the area of the shoulder, not by the shoulder itself but by its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the area of the shoulder is broken — and it is broken in the middle of the shoulder — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare the shoulder and reduce it to its natural position in any way possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place powdered chalk and stopper on the fracture; and then place double-layered cloth; and then place a thin layer of table salt according to the amount of the entire spatula or more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the layer is concave in any part of the shoulder, then level that concavity with stopper and then place the layer evenly.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then apply strength above with long tape for the compression of the layer until it is not moved from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament in each day; and all the time it is softened, apply another bandage and strengthen it and equalize the swelling if it remains in its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the patient on their left side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The splint is restored in 10 days or in 25 days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and you know that it is not from the bones of which the beginning was not feared or its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the bone of the foot and place it under the skin, then you cut it off, and remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio of abscess caut if something happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the thigh.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The thigh is broken in the middle of its length, and that part is still attached; but the ends of it are not united or comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And when the bone is broken in that place, it declines towards the parts inside and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, and severe vomiting and nausea; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a cushion between their shoulder blades; and then press on the muscles of the broken bone, and adjust the ribs of the patient to two vertical positions, and gently perform the operation of the bone and its alignment according to all possible methods and what is suitable for it, until the figure of the bone returns as it was before.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place a poultice and bandage over the broken bone and place it on a soft, flat surface of cloth or paper and similar materials to prevent it from becoming maggot-infested; and gently apply that over the broken bone so that it does not become putrid; and then apply some lotions to the wound according to the return of the flesh to its normal position, and strengthen that with a suitable dressing; and consider the wound throughout the healing process, and when it becomes soft, strengthen that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If necessary, to prevent dislodgment of the bandage or swelling, pain, abscess that has occurred in that place, you should remove and replace it and remove the plaster and correct what has occurred due to the method of treatment; and then return the plaster, if it is necessary to apply it again; and adjust the restriction until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the restoration of ribs when they are bruised.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You should know that rib fractures do not occur except in the largest parts that are on both sides; and from the extremities of those parts, no contractions occur except for those that are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And you should not be confused by the sensation of pain with the examination of it and its signs.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it is equal to the fracture according to the method possible, until it is covered by flesh, and then apply plaster and strength to the broken bone in that place, if necessary from that one.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the rib fracture is directed towards the inner parts, the patient experiences severe pain and puncturing, similar to the puncturing experienced by someone who has coughed, and for that reason, the bones are covered with a cloth; and they experience difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting, which is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ancients used this method with great success.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	They say that covering the patient's belly with a cloth causes inflammation and heat, so that the abdomen is full and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the outer parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	However, we do not use this method because it is not a reliable cause of generating abscess, if it does not occur; and if it has already occurred, we now help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they said that it should be placed above the wound and sucked strongly; but this is similar to reasoning, however, it is feared that the wound will draw too many fluids to the area due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they said to him: cover that place with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and place powder between his ribs until it is full, which should be the same as when you wrap a second-degree burn; and then cure the patient with the care of wounds from food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient is very strongly constrained and has not suffered from it, and the bone punctures the bandage, then place something over the wound on top of the patient, expose the broken rib, and then place your hand over that instrument that contains the cipher, which is preceded by the remembrance of the same, and cut the bone to facilitate its removal.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the loose lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, and treat that with ointments until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs in the wound, then you should cover it and insert powder into hot oil and place it over the wound, and treat the patient with that which covers the abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him lie on his side over which he usually sleeps until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter Nine
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of the fracture of the sacrum and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck and ribs, and they are similar to those in the sacrum and back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if this happens to anyone and you want to know whether they will be healed or not, consider the following: if their bones are already softened and stunned and dead and cannot move those nor extend nor strengthen them and when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel any pain in those places, then know that they are not healed, and in these conditions it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they feel pain in those places and pressures, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see similar things in the sacrum of the neck and want to know whether they will be healed or not, then consider their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you notice that it has already softened, then apply those things that happen in the abdomen, and when it is on its back, it becomes bloated and wants to defecate or urinate but cannot, then know that it is mortal, and therefore do not treat it.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If none of those things happen, the cause is better and less dangerous.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment of it is to puncture the abscess with a needle that you place on the spine, or with some mugwort leaves; place some cloths on it until the abscess is sedative.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters on it, and strengthen it with a bandage; and command the patient to rest and be calm and not sleep on the side where the pain occurs until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if the fracture of the bone is separated from it, then cover it with a bandage and set that bone; and adjust the wound edges, with stitches if it is large; and care for that wound with some animal fat until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the lower back of the spine is broken, and it is at the end of the coccyx, then you should insert your left hand into the anus, and equalize the broken bones as much as possible with the other hand; and place a poultice and bandage on it, if necessary, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken ribs in that area, then perform surgery on it, and remove that, and cure the wound with the treatment that is preceded by its healing.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the restoration of the ankle.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the ankles are often broken, and if they are broken, the fracture of them is only communication in the extremities of those and they are inserted in the length and decline to the parts of the wound; and the patient experiences pain at the location and puncture, and the bed is stupefied when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that which is above the fracture, which is the figure of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the end of it, then you should equalize it with the second one that you have prepared for equality, entering as much as necessary to be similar to its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is long or has declined to the parts below, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach until you are prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have equalized it, place your hand on the plaster, and place another hand on that star of wood or iron, and strain for stricture on the one you do not fear puncturing of fracture or removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And equalize the concavity of that which places it inside where the fracture takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their stomach or side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if abscess occurs, then you should cease from extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and place your hand on that which precedes it; and return to the restoration of it, and strain that which is with cover.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If the bones of the skull are fractured or crushed, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the treatment of the fracture of the humerus.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The humerus is that which is between the ribs and the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the treatment of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you grasp it at the place where the meat is thickest, according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And if it is connected in two ends of two bands, then lift it up from the location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on a chair; and when you reach the broken arm inside where it meets the shoulder, place the curvature of the bone in the middle of that.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And lift up some heavy weight, or the nurse extends it to the parts behind; and place the doctor where the fracture is closest together, until the fracture returns according to its form.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other nurse is that the patient should be placed on their back and their arm supported by the collarbone; then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds the pressure behind the patient; and each of them extends to their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you strengthen over the fracture and on the other side of the collarbone, and each of the two ministers extends to their part.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then cover that half of the collarbone over the shoulder and the other behind the fracture, on the side.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is on the side, then cover that collarbone over that place and on that side.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	And equal to that which is easy and their work, and when it is covered and applied according to the covering and application, then strengthen it if there is no suppuration after cauterization.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If a boil occurs, leave the stricture inside for seven days, and place your hand over it in a certain way to prevent it from spreading until it heals, and then remove it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The way to remove it is to apply a poultice over the wound, and then wrap it with clean cloth over the poultice; then adjust your arm on that support, and place your hand on their muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Then place the cloth and remove it over the arm support to prevent the arm from being in the wrong position, if there is any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And then place that splint that is closer and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of the fracture, and the length of the splints should be according to the broken bone plus three inches of all parts.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then remove it over the splints with the stricture that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And your restriction on the location of the fracture should be stricter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	When the fracture is more elongated, the restriction is less strict.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you see the position of the splints and the restriction as we have said at the time when you restore the member to its original position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear infection, then leave the restriction and splints until the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the limb in all parts for three days to prevent it from happening in the improper or inflamed location; or eating is prohibited until the member is disposed of due to excessive restriction; and therefore correct all of this as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are unsure that none of these causes will occur, then do not remove the bandage for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And the patient's head should be on their back, and their hands should be on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place your hand on the assistant completely covered with wool, and consider in all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not separated or dissolved, or that the limb is softened, therefore correct all of this according to your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And pause the patient's food according to the order we have given before, unless the food is subtle in the beginning until it begins to digest; and then wait until the food is fully digested.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	It is customary for the assistant and the person supporting the patient to be strong for ten days; and then wait until they are relieved, administered a bath, and treated with drugs that correct that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is not yet healed, then do not remove that bandage and those splints within one day or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is composed of two bones, which are called two forearms; one is small, and that is the one that is attached to the wrist, and the other is large and that is the one that is attached below the small one, from the part where it is attached.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the larger bone is broken alone, or the smaller one, and if both are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small intestine is pierced above, its restoration is less likely, and its healing is even less likely.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the large intestine is pierced below the fracture of which, its healing is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	It is even worse when two bones are pierced.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is pierced by the small intestine above, it is convenient for the doctor to facilitate its healing, and place a slight extension to prevent it from being equal.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large intestine is that which is pierced, then place a more forceful extension to prevent it from being equal.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both intestines are pierced, then place a stronger extension to prevent them from being equal.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And place the hand of the patient over the extension and the intestine, and place the other hand on the side of the patient's face, higher than all others, and the ear should be lower than all others, and the patient should lie on a flat bed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion under the patient's head or neck, to prevent them from moving.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And the assistant extends the arm of the patient further away from their side or over their body, and another assistant does the same.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the doctor straightens the bones until they are reduced to the best possible figure that can be achieved.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are any fractures in the bone, then carefully remove all the fragments to their original place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there is a fracture that appears to be separated and cannot be expected to be restored, then do as we have mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is open, you have already done this special procedure, and therefore take care of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should apply a piece of cloth dipped in warm oil and white wax, and it should be moist but not too thick, and strong cloth over that to cover the subtle structure until the abscess is reduced; and then remove the cloth and apply a prepared plaster made of powdered myrrh and honey, and let it dry.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the number of ribs in the arm is variable, either a fracture in one or two bones at once.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your bandage over the location of the fracture as tightly and forcefully as possible, and when more strips of the bandage are above the fracture or below it, place the bandage a little more loosely than it was before in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft cloths, not hard or sharp, and the best one is the one that is strong enough to be moved gently between being thin and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and its position closely.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there is any cause for which correction is necessary, such as the one that happens to the limb, and then cover it with water until that problem stops.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And do not keep the limb pressed until it relaxes, and then return the bandage.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the contraction has already been softened and the bone has regained its shape and similar to those, then with your skill, correct all of that.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive contraction, then gradually loosen that one a little and allow the nourishment to reach it within those days until it can again, and strengthen that one.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	However, if nothing happens to the patient that is similar to those we have mentioned, then do not allow it to be removed within the next 20 days or around those times.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And suspend the hand of the patient over them for their skill in moving and make that one sleep on their side.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or the strong one is restored in 28 days, and all of that depends on the condition of the complexions and the conditions of the skill.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of fracture of the little finger and those mentioned.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	When the pinch of the thigh and the knees of said tart have a fracture, do not apply any force to them, but use gentle pressure.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the patient has a fracture or sprain, make sure they remain lying flat and keep their legs in the same plane, and place your hand on the extended leg.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And the assistant should extend the broken bones and the doctor should align them in a good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And make sure to apply a plaster and bandage, but be careful not to apply it too tightly; and place your hand above the wound according to its size, and you have already wrapped it in a cloth of linen.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the bandage is in the parts of the intestines, then make it similar to a sling, and command the patient to hold it against their abdomen; make sure it is tightened long.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And make sure the part of the bandage that is elevated is in the cloth, so that the wound can be applied to the palm; and tighten it according to what is necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is at the parts deformed, then place your hand above and below the part of the bone, so that the muscle is exposed and straight; and then place the structure, as if it were rolled up in a bandage between the mentioned limbs.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If the fracture occurs in any of the bones of the mentioned limbs, then if it is a large bone, place it as strong as possible on the palm and if you wish, place a small straight splint to elevate the fracture and not to be deformed.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other mentioned bones, such as in the middle of the bone, or in the end, or in the ear, or in the ring, then it should be equal and flat on the said surface; or all should be even and continuous, which is better; or place a small splint above, as we have said in the large bone.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and place it above, the disposition of abscess cautery and opposition — against the said operation — against that which covers when any cause of those occurs, according to what is reported about it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the bone of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh are fractured and are declared to be broken as soon as they turn to the second pain and to the most severe.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of it is done in such a way that the bandage is stretched over the fracture and another bandage is placed under the fracture, and the patient lies on their back and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the assistant extends the bandage completely over the part according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is placed at the top of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed on the denolh to the part of the patella, so that the extension can be in it, and the other bandage under the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is placed at the bottom of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed on the denol to the part behind, and the extension to the parts in front.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor should gently move the bones of the arm, placing them back into their natural position and allowing the bone to heal properly; however, if there is an abscess on the member, then apply a bandage and compression, but do not allow the member to become infected.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	However, if there is an infection in the abscess, then leave it open for several days until the infection has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage for the fracture should be made as follows: wrap a hard bandage over the fracture, fold it twice or three times, and then remove any excess; and then place the pillow under the affected leg and foot.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Introduce the long felt between the thigh and the pillow, near the damaged area, and then cover the ends of the felt with a cloth that is more absorbent than the two parts; and then roll it up over the pillow and leg to cover any excess.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place your hand on the thigh in the location of the fracture, and place a cloth over the bones of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the empty spaces between the bed and the cushion with many folded cloths, so that the pressure is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin the strong bandage from the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you approach the edge of the fracture location, your bandage should be thinner and looser and wetter.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend two extremities of the bandage to the parts behind until it reaches the hollow of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the straps on the other side so that the bandage does not remain in its own place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then lay the bandage over that, so that it does not cause damage to the member with corrosion or abscess or inflammation and similar things; and if any of those causes occurs, then count on dismantling it, and correct what happened as soon as possible, according to the methods we have mentioned.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if in the bone there is a bone fracture that puts it, then try to align it as much as possible; and if not, put it on and return it, and cure the one that precedes the remembrance until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	When some splints are strengthened to this fracture of the thigh or others that are adjusted to its bones, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in the restoration of this fracture, it does not happen to the patient that he becomes paralyzed; and if it is restored alone, another cushion should be applied to the other knee, as it is necessary that he becomes paralyzed from that one.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the thigh is strengthened in ten days or a few more or a few months, and all this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and of the other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that the fracture of the shoulder bone occurs suddenly, but it does not happen to the other broken bones.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it happens to the fracture, then it is only a crack or tear in its parts, and that is a simple or double, and over that all is dependent on the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the bone should be equal to what was broken from the parts of the limb that are called joints, and it should be added and joined as much as possible according to equality and convenience and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then place a bandage and place it on that round stone, if necessary for that one; and strengthen it with a stricture at that convenience.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, such as the abscess cautery and similar to those that are opposite to all accidents that are convenient for that one until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You should know that in the ribs there are two bones of which one is large, and it is called the rib; and the other is thin, and it is called the costal.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And according to the species of fracture that occurs in those two bones of the arm, and for that reason, the restoration of the bone is made equal to the restoration of the arm, and the operation of the bone is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken at once, the cushion is placed in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if a more delicate bone is fractured, the cushion is placed in the Denant position.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if a larger bone is fractured, it is usually due to causes that are not within your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension and alignment and the splints according to that equality.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the bone is in the same place as the previous one, then the extension should be less and looser, and it will help your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the arm there is a reason for surgery, and that is when you align the splints and complete the entire operation, then you will take weights of iron rods that are placed next to the causes that are placed on the palms; they are similar to those with a small groove, and not like the hands, and it should be the longest of those according to the length of the arm and the elbow to the farthest.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then cover each one with a blanket in two layers according to its length, and place one over the part of the bed on one side and the other on the other side, and the other underneath the lowest part of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the three blankets in three places of the bed's extremities and at the middle, so that this structure prohibits the bed from tilting to the right or left side, and it is a good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then a small board according to the length of the bed is administered; and it is placed on the bed so that it maintains its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially cover that you do this in fracture, and when it is properly placed.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the bed every day and study how to maintain it, and you should guard it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and when something happens of those, then pause at the same time that it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus and bones of the foot and those mentioned.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Not all of the talus is fractured; rather, some fractures occur in the bones of the foot; and fewer fractures occur in the mentioned bones, and they do not occur to them but only in the joints of their position.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot suffer fracture and sometimes those bones are raised above themselves between them, then the patient should place his foot on the prepared ground as if walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place one foot on that which is raised from those bones, and step on them, and press, and equalize them until they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then place a poultice and a bandage above, and place a small table under the foot of the patient with two flat sides.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that part of the foot with a bandage and other causes of which it is in need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days pass, then you remove the bandage, where you find the bones equalized, or they are fractured or dislocated, and the operation in those is like this with such conditions.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If the patient's toes are broken, then repair those and equalize them with each other and with the healthy ones, and you should recommend their restoration in the treatment of the mentioned condition.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place your hand along the length of the broken toe and place a bandage on it; then move the foot to this table that is recommended for you, and strengthen that with a proper bandage.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If that bone is broken into two or three or more pieces, then you should place your hand on each part of the covered area in lion cloth, strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and have one of the caps of the table on the belly of the foot to hold it in place.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is necessary for you to not forget that you should consider all the causes that have been told to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have mentioned, and pause at any sign of that accident.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the knee of the woman and the bone of the patella and the vertebra of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the womb of the woman is crushed, then perform this cesarean section in the lower abdomen, and then gently place it on the back of the spine, and hold it there.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife should gently remove the womb from its position, and do so with the same caution as before; and then the woman should be gently shaken, and her arms raised little by little, until everything is removed from the area where the womb was, and the crushed bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powder on her back, and when she needs to urinate, gently help her to do so and remove the urine, and then reduce and return it according to the method by which it was placed initially, and then return it to its original position.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Do this for seven days or around those days, until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a catheter of silver and insert it into the urethra of the woman; and then inflate the entire bladder into the womb, and then gently blow through the catheter until the bladder is inflated inside the womb, so that the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to fill it with cotton and linen for several days as recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the bones of a man or woman's patellar tendon are fractured, then administer in the recovery and needle insertion of that which we have recommended in the bone of the thigh.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is drawn out should not be hidden in these nearby fractures and that it does not happen, especially to the one to whom some study and use and understanding of this free motion is given; because that fracture means to you in the major dispositions via dreyturiera in the recovery and in the structure of it, and therefore understand be.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the wound of a man when it is split, take guarguamela of lead, and put the wound in that; and place your hand over it wrapped in cloth, and be wrapped, and be left for three days or around those, and be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the recovery of bone fractures when it is impacted.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the one who has suffered a fracture to have, especially if the bone is large like the bones of the jaw or the helper, or similar to those, that you should have and use a splint as soon as the conditions for splinting are present.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the fracture does not heal, then make sure you hold it in place by applying three fingers of powder on it, unless there is another cause.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture in that place, but do not prolong it unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	However, if an abscess occurs, leave the restoration of it until the sixth day, before it subsides, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause further harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	However, if the broken bone is prominent above the coccyx, then make sure you reduce it and equalize it with your fingers at your convenience and with minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension does not match your prepared equilibrium and the patient's legs, then you reduce it to your hands and this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight spans, and its width is according to the extent of the injury; and for that reason, it is necessary for the doctor to have three or four of these instruments in every special case of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be smooth, and in the part that is greasy, so that it does not slip off the instrument during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have a sharp end that is marged in its extremities; and the underside of it should be broad and thick, and the top of it should go into the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called "labrave" in Greek, which is the name of the instrument.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the end of it can be placed on the elevated part of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And apply pressure on that spot until the bone returns, and it should be equal to some equality.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then apply force to equalize the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of it is thin, and you do not take that tool for good reason, then you should insert the extremity of that bone where the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone to all of that which we have recommended, then insert that which is necessary for it from among the tools that we have mentioned; or use a saw on that in some way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then remove those which are in the bone of roughness and small scratches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and the patient feels great pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do that which you have advised the patient greatly.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is completed, which you have done to the bone, then apply a bandage with tightly bound sterile black cloth, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place it over the wound or any other cause in which oil is present, so that it does not cause further injury and corrosion.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer splints at the time of the bone's complementary restoration, and leave the wound exposed to prevent it from being covered with bandages according to the amount of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to expose the wound to the fracture, as it is customarily done by folly doctors, who make incisions on their thighs, which are mortified or rotten and putrid, which is harmful.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the patient's fracture is loose, soft, different from the fracture of the others.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear that those evil accidents which we have mentioned might occur, and cause great pain in the area, then do not place splints over them, but instead make an envelope of cloth in the place of splints and strengthen it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the wound begins to close after one or two days, which is when it starts to heal, then remove the cloth that you placed over it and administer poultices, using those that we usually use to treat wounds, such as tetrapharmacon and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is agreed that you should remove the bandage and consider the pain in each joint at dawn and evening, before it is consolidated and closed, and make sure that the member is prepared in such a way that the inflammation flows from it to the nearby parts for ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the pain lasts for several days and is not consolidated or discharged from it, then know that here are some remedies to help you search for the pain and treat it.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those remedies, those that are separated and removed should be chosen, those that are not separated and placed on the member and cause more pain, you should choose those that are possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain is caused by zuchem or eluchen, which are diseases or another special type of corruption and putrefaction, then make sure that you place on it one of those remedies that are appropriate for the cure of which a previous account has been given in its own chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that in which you should place the best advice and you make present your hand: when the large bones are cut, raise it over the member as if they were the bones of the joint and similar to those of the large members, and do not assume attraction or removal of it, which may occur after a long time; leaving that inside for a while, because it will cause great pain for 20 days or 30 days; and then cure the pain if you see fit, and if not, leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the treatment of swelling that occurs at the site of a certain fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Swelling occurs at the site of healing of a fracture, and more so near the joints, and is caused by the figure of the member; and it greatly prevents the member from performing its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, consider if the swelling is recent and administered in those medicines that have been stiptic with aloe, and ense, and mira, and sercacollo, and acrassia, and similar to those; in which you take some or all of them, and comfort those with a stiptic o album of honey, or a stiptic of vinegar, and place that on the swelling in a cloth, and bind it over the swelling for good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And loosen the bandage that does not leave the swelling for several days; and remove it and apply another, until the swelling is reduced; or strengthen on the swelling with a plaster of lead, which has the property of reducing everything that is inflamed in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the joint is already hardened and strained, and it does not necessarily cause gout, then cut that part of the bone that is most protruding, and scrape off the excess and eminent, or remove that part with a sharp instrument before it becomes re-inflamed; and cure that part while it is still healing.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the fracture is restored and the limb is set, it should not be placed in its natural position.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and the limb is set, it should not be done for many reasons: one of which is that the solution of the flesh and ligament of the bone is not made according to its nature; or because there is an excess of stricture of the bones before the nutrient can reach the limb; or because there is too much embrocation; or because there is excessive movement not in its proper time; or because of weakness in the body of the patient and because of its debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The treatment for that is to make the patient lie on their back and keep them like that until the swelling increases in it; and administer baths, and apply compresses and leeches on it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts nourishment to it, or continues to draw out the impure humor from it, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the treatment of broken bones that are restored improperly and prevent surgery from being performed on them due to this.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When an injury occurs to a limb that has already been restored, it is necessary to correct the deformity of the broken bone and the nodosity, and to shape it in the form of the limb, but if the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then you should not accept the word of those who claim that the limb is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But many foolish doctors and restorers have done this in our time; and this operation is very reprehensible, causing great fear of the fatal consequence that results from it.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the patient has recently experienced swelling and pain, it is recommended to apply a poultice made of warm water mixed with softening herbs such as elderflowers, rue, melliot, and similar ones; or use a softening plaster like diallylquinolone; or use a poultice made of ground rue leaves and spread it on the affected area; or use a poultice made of crushed figs mixed with honey and applied to the area; or use a poultice made of crushed garlic and spread it on the affected area.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some herbs are dissolved in an abundant amount of light oil and applied to the most humid parts of the body, and administered to promote movement of the limb at all parts in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the bending has already become chronic and is strong and converted into bone and causes the need for cure of the bone using iron, it is recommended to apply a poultice made of a lot of leek juice and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and scrape off any excess from the swelling of that part with a small surgical saw, and administer a remedy for relief in that case.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is an injury to one of the joints of the body, which prevents movement, distorts the figure of the member, and brings pain and great injuries to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is best to reduce it as soon as possible, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very painful, and in such cases, the reduction of dislocation is difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And to avoid this, it is not advisable to move or stretch the limb during the inflammation stage, because movements and stretches can bring on spasms and slow pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When such an event occurs, it is advisable to approach the patient's bedside, and wait until the inflammation subsides; then, the limb should be rubbed with warm water and oil, and reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the entire limb should be treated with that which will bring its memory back to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already ordered the capital letters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the shoulder bone, it enters into the part that was just left.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter twenty-four.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the cure of jaw dislocation.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the lower jaws are not dislocated; and the dislocation of others is done in one of two ways: either they are reunited with their places by a little removal, and they are slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and completed, until they are softened at the part of the joint through which the saliva of the patient flows and which cannot hold that nor can close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his cheek.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of it is slight, then return it to its place in the greatest positions if it can be done without cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and completed, then apply reduction of it more carefully, and do not delay for too long.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the patient's head, and insert the surgeon's fingers on one side of the jawbone near the mouth of the patient, if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both fingers simultaneously on both sides, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other two fingers on the cheeks of the patient, and equalize them; and command the patient to stop clenching their jaw and remove the fingers from each part; and the surgeon should equalize the jawbone and push it back into place before it returns to its original position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jawbones are dislocated, then apply heat and oil to the neck and back, until the reduction of both is made, and do not delay the reduction of both for too long, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they are returned and equalized, and the patient's mouth is closed but not molded, then place a poultice of cloth on those parts made of wax and rose oil; and apply it to facilitate movement in the jaw.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And the patient's head should be positioned between two cushions, so that it does not move to the right or left; and do not force any cause; having the patient's own view, then remove the bandage when the pain is relieved and the jaw is unobstructed, then move that which you want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with ease, and do not force the opening of the mouth for feeding, drinking, and other activities, until the jaw is unobstructed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws in a certain hour and they are not converted to their usual places, then use cold compresses and frequent baths, and strongly apply heat to the patient's abdomen, and strongly apply vomiting to purify the body.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, know that it is fatal; and those who experience this will die within several days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	The reduction of the dislocation of the sternum and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The sternum is not dislocated from the chest due to its continuity with the breast; and some ribs are dislocated at the front, and that is called pain in the chest.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then cover the area with your hand with strong pressure, so it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then place a poultice and powders on it and strengthen it with that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The extremity of that which is bent and connected to it, is not dislocated in any day; however, if it is reduced and straightened according to what we have said and according to what is at your disposal.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then place a poultice, powders, and compression on it, and command the patient to remain quiet and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the base of the tongue to the base behind.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this is done quickly; and it is not dislocated behind the shoulder blade; and it is not dislocated downward through the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most often dislocated and deformed and remains at the base behind the tongue, and especially in those where the flesh is thin, it is easily dislocated; but in those where there are fat muscles, it is difficult to be dislodged.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And it often occurs to men by blunt trauma or contusion, and the muscle of which is abscessed with an abscess, and it is treated for that because it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then you should know that you should not enter that until you are over-serious about it, and then proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known as dislocation when the parts behind are deviant; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the unaffected muscle, because you find differences between them; and you feel in the head of the concave muscle behind the tilt of the muscle cap as if a bone, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to its usual position, nor move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you should press or lift it, and you should feel the distinct touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of this is that the practitioner raises the hand of the patient above the parts; and you place your fingers behind the tilt of the affected part, and strengthen the joint in its usual position, and the practitioner raises the hand of the patient, and extends it in that direction; and you pause it where it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return, and since we have said that the dislocation occurred from the beginning, then after several days, the patient should be bathed in warm water and administered a bath that softens and melts, as if it were made of herbs such as rosemary, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back and positioned under the patient's head a wool cushion that is even between elevation and restriction, and the doctor places their hand on the patient's thigh, raises the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the patient's arm so that it does not fall to the side, and another minister holds the patient's head, so that it does not fall to the side, because at this time they return to their place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is taller than the patient, and stand on the side of the other, and insert his muscle under the pillow of the patient and raise the pillow of the patient to the parts above until the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's arm from the sides of their belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is heavier, then cover that with which another cause is suspended, because that will cause dislocation to return quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced by another method: and it is that a long stick should be placed on the ground, like a mortar, which should not be too thick or too thin, and placed behind the patient; then the patient's head should be placed on the top of the stick covered with leather lions, and the patient should stand along the length of the stick, and the hand of the other part should be extended to the parts behind the other part; and the other part should be strengthened by the other part, because the joint returns to its place at speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult for all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stick of the length of two fists, and its width should be four digits, and its thickness should be thinned at the tip in the form of a titillus.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place a round leather lion on its head so that the stick does not descend the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place the patient's head on the titillus, and extend the hand or arm over the stick between the parts behind, and tie the stick, the arm, and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place one arm on a sloped scale according to the latitude, and the hand should be extended to the parts behind, and the other object should be suspended from the other side, as the joint enters quickly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	Then apply the instrument to the patient according to any possible method, and afterwards place a piece of wool of equal quantity over the tender part; and then apply a prepared paste of powdered mustard and albumen on the entire muscle, as it is rolled up above, and then place a stricture decently behind the tender part; and the bandage should be rolled up on the paste, and the hand of the patient should be attached to the collar of the patient, and it should be left, and not be disturbed for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And make sure that the food of the patient is given in small amounts, until the member is comfortable, because it is more beneficial for their healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And the food should be given in larger amounts after seven or eight days and some exercise should be done; and if it is stopped and not made flexible, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to moisture that has accumulated in it or for some other reason, then apply a pointed cautery three times, according to what is said in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all of this has been done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandage and splint have been reduced due to some swelling, and it is not healed, nor catheterized, and cannot be raised above the parts above, then know that the nerves of which are at the head of the muscle, whether they are cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	To reduce the dislocation of that which is made from the elbow and forearm or behind, reduction is done by impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And the other bandage is applied there, and it is cured within the time that it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing is delayed in the limb and the movement of which is slow, then use moist bandages within the time that the gravity is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and also returns with difficulty; and when it is dislocated in all parts, especially at the part where the arm meets the body, and the dislocation of it is not caused by a fall or by some touch according to any figure as it is dislocated, and when you adjust the shoulder which is dislocated, it does not return to its place, that is your clear indication, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you should feel that the shoulder is out of place, and reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes to its proper position, because if you see that it has come to its proper position, the reduction is difficult, and not always cured; and especially when it is at the back parts, because it is worse than all other species of dislocation, and causes more pain, and more dangerous movements away from that place, which can lead to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	When restoring the patient, when it is possible to reduce it, the doctor's hand should be extended towards the two sides, and the arm of the patient should be expanded, and the surgeon's fingers should be on the back and under the patient, and the elbow should be pushed towards the joint or the palm of the hand where it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is at the joints, then return it by bending the doctor's arm and his hand, until it hits the back and the palm of the hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And if two assistants are extending the arm, then two assistants should hold it in place to prevent it from being pulled away during extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate the arm completely, so that it is wrapped in a folded cloth or bandage over the doctor's hand.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, apply some oil to prevent it from happening again and facilitate the movement of the joint until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then bring the reduction of the uterus that is placed on that padding in which there is stiffness and execution of an album of hen's egg, and it is extracted from the stricture descent, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and it is left for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then remove the sling; and if the joint is formed in its place, then remove the bandage of it and leave it there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strong enough, then repeat the bandage and the sling, and leave it there for a few days until it is extracted; and then remove the sling.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if the weight of the joint causes the reduction, and its position is in movement, then administer moisture in baths and gentle friction, and compresses, until it is removed; or place a greasy cloth on the joint, and leave it there on the bone and the night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that bandage, and put it in the bath; and when you are done, then rub the joint with cold friction, and repeat over the greasy cloth, which is a roll of movement, one day, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	with a warm instrument, when it is lukewarm.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place it over that cow's wound, which is moist and scalded, and apply some drying agents, as it is moist and reduce it to its proper state.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is at the joint that is between the arm and the chest.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The shoulder of the chest sometimes becomes dislocated, and the reduction of that dislocation is difficult, but rather it is important to have speed in reducing it at the time when it is dislocated, because the joint may become abscessed or something else happens in the abscess.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of that dislocation is that you place the shoulder joint of the patient on a table and the assistant extends the arm of that person, and the doctor places his hand or his palm on the imminence of the joint, and pushes it into place as it returns to its proper location.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	When the palm is not yet placed on the patient's belly, then place the patient's back on a table to extend and reduce; and if the dislocation is previous, then position the patient's back intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand is near the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns soon, good; and if not, then apply pressure to the abscess and leave that; and do not repeat that, because otherwise, it will not heal or you cannot reduce it more than passing days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint is twisted; and the patient does not know any cause, but the hand is soft and cannot strengthen any cause; then you should know that the nerves are cut or torn, and you should not insert in it, but rather strengthen with a pointed cautery to the wound of it and strongly apply that.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And when the abscess returns, then place it on the pressure that we have recommended, and leave it and strengthen it for several days; and then remove it and leave it and the hand of it should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the patient's movement is obstructed and there is some gravity involved, then apply a wet cloth and some friction to the affected area, until they are relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29:
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Concerning the cure of dislocations of those joints.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes these dislocations occur in all parts.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of those joints is dislocated at the base of the thumb or in the abdomen, then bend the affected part and push the dislocation back into place, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the joint, and suspend the weight of that limb to the part where it is dislocated, and leave it like that for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it again and extend it until it is equal to the other side on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is not yet straight, apply the second treatment as described, and do not stop rubbing that part on that day and exercising its movement, and apply the second treatment at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same as you did with the foot, if the patient's abdomen is dislocated, and attach it to that part and perform the first surgical operation on it until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And do the same as you did with the abdomen when other parts are dislocated.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and the remaining vertebrae from those locations are not healed, then death approaches the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And in such cases, the patient's evacuation is not under their control, and they cannot retain it; and softening occurs in some of their members or their bedding or their pillows or one of those; or if a vertebra remains in its place, then softening occurs in them and in those, and removal is made at four points.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then it has already been removed to the back parts and is called gout.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	When the cure of the patient is that the coldness has occurred due to pregnancy, then it is not curable nor healable in that case.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	However, in those cases where it occurs due to impact or percussion or similar to those, as the ancients mentioned the methods of cure for such prolonged speech, which is the most beneficial; however, I have already and improved upon that from which a few people excuse themselves from too much of it, because of its proximity to understanding and explanation, which he has exposed and formed from various instruments of that kind, which I will show you and explain.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that in coldness which occurs due to the part of the body in the chest, it is not curable nor healable in that case; and similarly in those cases where it is made on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, none are cured except that which occurs naturally in the back, which I will recommend to you.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be extended on their face with an equal distance from the wall, and should be extended behind that instrument wet for so that the chest of the patient does not stick to it.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then place a stick upright, with its base on the ground at the end of the bed around their head, and another stick in front of their feet at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the servant should hold the stick, and not be stationary in a ditch; and another servant should hold the other one according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then cover the patient's head with a cloth and leave the leather whip firm; extend the end of the whip to the stick that should be held against their head, and attach it there; and strengthen the other leather strap over their ankles, holding their bedding; and adjust all the straps and attach them to the other stick that should be held against their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the servant should extend the strap to the part of the stick where it is attached, and not remain in that position with both sticks and straps in the places where they were placed, but rather not be stationary as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places their hands on the spine at the strength point until they return, or places them on a table, and adjusts their feet on the table until they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return in this way, then take a table whose length or width is about three spans, and carve a hole in the wall where we have said that the patient should be placed between the ends of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place your hand on the edge of the table over the spine, and the doctor places their feet on the other end, and wait until the spine is tightened and returns to its original position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open the turn of the chair that is revolved around the arm; and it is that you should stay on the ground with the patient's head at the back of the chair between two sticks, the length of which is an arm, and the patient's head at the back of the other chair just above two sticks; and the distance between each stick should be a palm, and it has been made in each stick through which the turn goes, and each one should be stopped on the ground so that it does not become crooked.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should also be another stick in which the turn is, and it should be revolved in the two grooves of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	At the end of it is a tube in which the tube is formed, the length of which is a palm and a hand, and in the other two tubes is similar to that one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then strengthen the ropes that you have tied in the chest of the patient in the tube that is on his head, and the ropes that you have tied in the cushions of the patient in the other tube that is on his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Then each tube should be turned and a servant should turn the tube with his hand, and the doctor should massage the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the tube:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the spine is turned and the area is massaged, then apply a thick layer of egg white on the area, and stop; and place a tablecloth over the egg white, the width of which is three spans or around those, and the length of it is the amount that the area took up, and on the side of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a bandage made of linen that we have mentioned, and use the patient as nourishment until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any imminence in the place at the end of the healing, then apply medicines that are moilific and liniscan for the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is already administered in that place, the plaster of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some days after the incident in the back of the ribs of the spine, and it is for that dislocation; and that bone which already immines for that reason, so that it does not cause any further harm to you at this medicine, because it will do great damage to you.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle only end with dislocation, and not with those that occur at other joints with a small removal and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the wide is dislocated in four ways, either at the front parts, or at the back parts, or at the right side parts, or at the left side parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is mainly dislocated at the front parts, and rarely at the right side parts or at the left side parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And when adjusting the patient's pillow to make them comfortable, if the affected foot is longer and more swollen than the other, the patient cannot bend their knee, and this is where the swelling may become an abscess, so the head of the pillow has already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the rare case of that which happens is at the back parts, because the accidents of it are opposite to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the rare case of that which happens is at the right side parts, because if the other pillow is expanded according to convenience, but does not bend towards the painful knee, and if it is perforated to go and cannot be placed on the right side parts; and the urine of it is retained, and the soiling of it becomes an abscess, and you must place the ambulance of it on the thigh.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	When the person who has experienced dislocation at the back parts cannot extend their arm, nor can they bend the one that is bent, and the cushion under them is shorter than the other, and the bent part is softened, and the head of the cushion is placed in that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of these species of dislocation is that you consider, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been treated before, then you administer reduction of it according to its arrangement, but not in that cure of all; and therefore do not expect that in that there be made provision.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In that one of which the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should do this to it that you turn the joint and extend it to the back parts and the front parts, and on the right and left, for it will return strongly and does not require other cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	However, if it does not return in this way, then you should expect that you prepare strong medicine and extend the cushion of it from the part most behind, or at its hands, or at the cloth which is laid over the cushion above the arm; and another minister extends the hand of it above the tingling parts of it; and strongly hold the lion's skin on the edge of the cushion, and another minister cleanses the end of the cloth.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if it is necessary to extend the patient's limb or the part of the body from the elbow to the shoulder, or from the back to the back of the shoulder.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if it is necessary to extend all of those in a row while the patient is lying on their side and they are hanging down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is especially common for all four limbs.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for each special case that is directed at the specific cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the dislocated limb, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts below, have the patient lie on their side; and place the ligaments over the ridge of the cushion in that location where the head of the cushion and the location that is placed next to it; and extend the ligament from the elbow to the next part of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister strongly grasps the patient's arms, and presses the large part of the patient's body and extends to the parts forward by strong extension until it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This particular treatment is the least harsh cure for which this member is reduced compared to other treatments.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	However, if it is not possible for you to follow this treatment of healing completely, then have the patient's two feet tied together with a strong, lighter rope than usual, above their ankles and below their knees.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each should be equal to four fingers, and the patient's leg should be extended more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And the patient should be hung over the end of the bed, and in the highest position; and the length of the rope from the ground should be equal to two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong young man to pull on the cushion, and another young man should be suspended from the patient, and the other young man should strengthen the support with a lever, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	However, in the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the front part of the body, have the patient lie down on their back after we have recommended that they have been properly positioned; and strengthen the rope over the patient's leg and on their chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then bring two cushions, one under their feet and the other under their head; and then adjust the cushions to the middle of the patient's chest, so that the patient is not suffocated by the cushion being between their legs, so you must extend the parts behind them.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister extends their part, and the doctor places their hand on the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you follow the reduction, it is generally good; and otherwise, pause carefully and have what we have said in the glossary for that equalness.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May it be that the patient shakes their head quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the parts behind, then it is said that the blanket should be extended widely, and according to this method narrative about the patient; and the doctor places the palm of their hand on the long bone of the patient, and then covers the other hand with it, and at that covering pause the one extended to the parts behind at the part of the elbow.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is at the back, it is not advisable for the patient to be extended at the back, and should be raised on the ground; having a pillow under their back, as if the patient's jaw is dislocated forward, according to what we have said about the position of the patient on two pillows; and it is over their face and the restraints are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it should be applied with compression on the table over the area where the joint is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is completed as follows - and the assistant of the reduction of the patient does not leave you, and it is that you extend two pillows from the patient, and when you see those equal and the patient extends the other pillow and expands that side, then you know that the member according to what we have said returns - and then you adjust two things and press and extend at the bend where the pillow is not too hard in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then remove the bandage and apply it again, and place one cushion under one side and the other under the other side.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those joints in the correct position, then know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and apply that, and extend it according to its first structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then remove that, and apply it again in the ambulatory for several days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the thumb.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The thumb is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated at the base, at the knuckles, and at the fingers, but not at the tip.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of thumb dislocation is that you command the patient to place their cushion on the side; then know that the thumb is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all the patient's limbs is to place the patient upright, unless they can sit on something; hold their head between your hands, and place their foot between your feet; and then help them to grasp your palms, and tie those between your palms over the patient's shoulder, and another minister extends their leg inside so that the shoulder returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And during the patient's recovery, their bed should be elevated so that it is not laborious.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then place that plaster on the bed and hold the bed against the wall, and tie those bands for three or four days, and then remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's bed for walking for several days until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of the patient to you is excused, then administer strong extension to the tendons of which in the cure of the hand previous narrative.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Sometimes the ankle is dislocated by a small movement, and sometimes it is dislocated in full rotation, and the dislocation of it is made at the front or back parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of it is that sometimes the ankle inflates and protrudes from the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The cure of the dislocation of it is of great difficulty, and it is that it should be extended with ease to the hand and returned without delay.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In the cure of it when it is dislocated in full rotation, one should make the patient lie on their back, and hold that one a strong and skilled person from behind the shoulder of that one in the middle part of it.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you should take your left hand on the inner side of the foot farthest from the knee in the location of the calf.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then approach the foot to your right hand, and approach the left for two reasons, and extend the left; and push the chest of the foot towards the right side of the bed.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make those two reasons when you have counted them.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the chest of the foot to the third side of the bed, and you are at the chin.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So return in one direction or two using this method, and if you see the foot equal, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation on it, until it returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing it to that position, then place the patient on their left side on the ground, and place a pillow under their head, and put something between the patient's thighs, and you have already covered them with a blanket so that they do not slide.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the assistant of the patient holds their limbs, and another assistant extends the foot to their hands or to the ribbon that lies on the back of the foot; and then extend each assistant against the extension of their side, and the pillow should be extended between the patient's thighs, so that the thing of the patient is not pulled away from its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor straightens the dislocation with his hands, and another servant holds the clean cloth at the ready parts, as the dislocation returns to its ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and you declare the patient's health from its reduction, then pause to apply a strong plaster, and tie the foot to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful not to press the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over that does not hurt and it is strongly bound there.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it like that for two days or three; and if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And remove it on the third day or fourth, and prevent the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to go out in that space, do not make sure that the dislocation has not been dissolved and corrupted, and avoid that which does not require healing.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if the abscess opens, then carefully apply what we have said in the chapter of that, in another place of healing and embrocation, until it is reopened.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter thirty-four.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the treatment of the aforementioned joints of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Whoever has a dislocated joint should apply some extension to its workings; and this is not difficult, if one goes before it.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in the bones of the back of the foot, then apply this to the patient's foot on a level surface or on a table, and be present there as if you were going.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then approach the patient's foot, and place your hand on that which comes from the joints, and gently press on that side of the foot until it returns, and you see that it is equal to and does not appear in the elevated position.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place a table under the patient's foot that holds the entire foot, which has two lids, and strengthen that side of the structure in a decent and firm manner for three days; and then remove it and make it rest for several days, until it is restored and its recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the special types of dislocation that are caused by pain or fracture or any other means.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occurs, and you perform the cure of that and its restoration, sometimes death results.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that reason, you should not presume to cure it, but rather use the knowledge gained from long experience, mercy and pity, late, not hasty or arrogant; and that you use in the beginning of medicines that lead to abscesses only, and leave the patient to divine judgment, unless to that one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, for the relief of malady, and in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore you should first try to reduce it in the beginning of the cause, giving that it leads to abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as they wish, then administer the regimen that leads to abscess and heals the pain, and that which is appropriate for it from the decoctions of drying.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the stable bones that are separated, then pierce their skin, and do as we have said in the simple cases of that in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid that instrument according to your virtue in the ways of fear, following what my preaching preceded; for that is better for you to give to your own Creator, and more enduring to your glory, and more salutations to your own being as those see in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Ayssi end the words of Albucasim perfectly from which God may not be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
