Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	And so begins the vocabulary of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, my sons, I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, in order to fulfill its purpose and for its explanations and for its declarations, it seems to me that I have completed what I promised you in this treatise, which is part of surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The operation of the umbilical cord has been completely forgotten in our region and in our time, until recently when the science of it was rediscovered, and its evidence is now established; and no one knows about it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which were lost and led to errors and uncertainties until the understanding of it was established and its length was extended and its art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I see that I should arrange this treatise in the second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work, which is necessary for addition to the declaration, and for preparation of it, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	In ancient times, the reason why an artist was not considered skilled in their own body was because the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which was rediscovered by Galen before he knew the joints of the members and the forms of those, and the conjunction and separation of them; and also the knowledge of bones, nerves, and cartilages, and their number, and their hardness; and of pulsating veins, quiet veins, and the locations of their emission.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for that reason, Hippocrates said that a name is not important, but in the work, it is more important in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	Because we have already mentioned that one in the introduction of this book; for those who do not know what we have said about anatomy, they are not exempt from falling into error by which many men die, as I have seen too many of those, because also they are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	When a doctor saw a woman who had suddenly developed an abscess called an aneurysm in her neck, and it had pierced some of the neck's arteries, causing a large amount of blood to flow into her, she died between their hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And another doctor saw that the thorn of a man who had died was stuck in his state, and the thorn was large, and he came to him and tried to remove that thorn with a hook, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And he had already tried to remove it, and saw that because of the size of the thorn and the position of the patient, he knew that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And another doctor took the wages of a duke from our land for surgery, and went to a skilled blacksmith who was needed for his fracture in the patient's body; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he tried to remove the fracture, above the wound, with pillows and crutches with strong structure, and did not leave the wound open.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then remove the dressing according to his wishes, and remove the bandage, and remove the lint for several days and command that we remove the bandage; and at this time, if the wound and the foot are infected, it will reach a critical point.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And then I was called to him, and I prepared to remove the bandage, and I achieved peace and eased his pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so it could not be restrained from that one, and it did not cease to spread the corruption in the limb until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who pierced an abscess and it became ulcerated after several days, until the wound became infected with a great deal of pus.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of this is that the wound is purged of melancholic humor, so it does not reach the bone at all, but rather the limb that suffers from it should be kept still.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for that, children, it is necessary for you to understand that the operation should be divided into two parts: one in the operation that is associated with immediate safety, and another in the work that is performed in the best positions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already experienced that in all places of this book where the operation is performed in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against that and lay down that, so that the fools do not approach to speak to you and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons in diligence and protection of God, and your patients in facility and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God to lead them to salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay aside the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and keep your weapons from that which makes you afraid, so that your position in your faith and in your name does not escape you: because more remains for your glory, and more after to the world and later to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	In some of his books, he discusses:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	He does not discuss the treatment of bad patients, because they do not remember what they have been told.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already devised this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	This is the beginning of the division of the book, and the first of the first section.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered according to the entrance of the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the handles of cautery, and what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second section.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and puncturing, and on windbags, and on ulcers, and on the extraction of similar objects, all chapters and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third section.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of twisting and similar objects; chapter ordered according to the entrance of the foot, and in the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of pointed cautery and sharp medicine and remembering of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that, begins the treatise of all the free.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	That you know the quality of those handles and of the tools of that cautery, and in what condition it is prohibited to use the cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, the speech about the quality of the handle and of the tool of that cautery is a long and prolix, and subtle for knowledge, and secretly hidden; and from there to speak much of secrets, and of them they have differed, and I will leave a little of their speeches, fearing prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore, it is said that cautery corresponds to all the universal composition, which is matter or its matter, except for two conditions, which are conditions of tail-like matters.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the condition of tail and dry matter, they disagree; because one said that cautery is suitable for that, and the others said the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in illness which is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that sickness be tail-like and dry matter that is burned and dry is healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And tell that one who says the opposite of that, which is said to be very useful in all kinds of back and dry pain that is seen in the bodies of men, because when you compare the bodies of men with the moisture of them to the appearance of fire, it often harms the bodies of men.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the word of that one, who has experimented with this in some cases discovered.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But may not come over that one who has already been trained and practiced in the capital of cautery by later practice, and knows the diversity of the appearance of men and the disposition of their diseases, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the span of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other appearances, do not fear you, and more in the diseases that are wet and humid, because all the doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree in the usefulness of cautery in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, my children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and its goodness, is above cautery in medicine, because fire is simple, the action of which only reaches the member that is cauterized and not the other member attached to it without a small harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the act of medicine has brought them to that in the members which is from there, and it often brings pain to the sick member and often causes difficulty in healing.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	May the fire, for its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do that but rather exceeds it. And we know this through experimentation and the length of service in the study of the art over the truth of the causes; and because of this, you are excused from the length of the sermon. If not for the fact that it is not read aloud in this place to you secretly by fire, and the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels evils, the philosophical demonstration speech would be sharpened in your eyes.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they disregard the time in which it is appropriate to make a cauterization and pause at the best time of primeval.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harm caused by time is submerged in the benefit of which the cauterization is thrown, and more so if the cauterization is for pain or necessary painful ones, quickly and forcefully, the ones that do not suffer delay because of the fear of those who come from evil, which is greater than small harm entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And do not catheterize in your feet, oh sons, that is only estimated by the common people and foolish doctors, because that malady which is cured by cauterization is not always effective, and they stop that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not always as they think for that, because cauterization is only a remedy in a place of medicine which alters the appearance and dries out the moisture which is the cause of the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But rather use cauterization excessively over medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his malady returns at some time of the day, according to the appearance of the patient and the location of his malady, and its virtue, and that which is prepared in the body of him from the aggregation of superfluities in him, and that which is obtained to him in his acquisition in foods and similar causes; but the malady in which cauterization is administered is a subtle malady in a member of few superfluities and moisture, such as a toothache for pain and similar causes, it is possible that in it does not return that pain, but that which is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And in common speech, it is believed that the pointed cautery is the best remedy in medicine, and in correct speech, I do not know what they mean by that, because they believe that there is no cure that can be achieved through medicine or any other cause that does not involve a pointed cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and they understand that the pointed cautery is the best remedy in medicine is only when administering methods of treatment in some diseases, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause, they administer it, and it is effective for that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here they believe that the pointed cautery is the best remedy in medicine, not as they understand it, which I understand from the common people and too many foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that gold is better than iron for a pointed cautery, and they did not say so only because of the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the location of the pointed cautery does not matter, since it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen that there are some people who can do it in one way and others who cannot, and a pointed cautery made of gold is better and more effective than one made of iron, but however when you make a pointed cautery with fire and gold, it is not your responsibility, since it depends on the quantity that you want to use for the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive the heat; and if you adjust it over the fire, the gold melts in the fire, and some layers are made by the craftsman for that purpose.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for that, a pointed cautery made of iron is used, slightly and more directly to the straightness of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter in the second chapter of the cautery, and I have ordered those between the feet, so that they ask for what they want from him.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of the cautery for pain in the head due to coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery gives to the moisture and coldness over the main cause of which are the two causes that cause so much damage, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the hands and the temples fluent, and many sleep, and pain in the teeth and the gums, and generally of all evil that comes from coldness, such as paralysis, sudden and apoplexy, and similarities in those evils.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first command the patient to take a laxative medicine to clean the head, for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and his age and his custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command the one who shaves his head to do so with a razor, and then make that person sit on a chair leaning over the bed and place their hands on their chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place your thumb on the blade of the razor near the humps of his nose.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, if the location you mentioned does not reach, then mark that location with a tent, and then apply the cautery made of olive oil of which this is the shape:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that over the location as best as possible with a tent, and then apply the cautery gently, making sure it does not touch the skin too much, and you rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then slightly lift your hand and look at the location, and if you see that some part of the head is uncovered, like the amount of gra of errors, then lift your hand, and if it does not return, place your hand on that or another of those, if it is cold, enter that which I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on that spot and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your hand over the burned area and leave it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with quadrifarmacon oil until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that when the plague is present, the more honey is applied, the better and more beneficial it is.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say that it should be cauterized in the groove of the bone into the bone, and held there until some part of the bone is attached.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove that which has been attached to the bone, and then treat it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cauterizer should reach the back, until it becomes strong in the bone before the bone breaks, and this is the way to make a small alphaca:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate that from that spot the vapors of the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And keep the wound open for a long time, and then cure it before it becomes solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these two types of cauteries in any other people, except for some who use them as a second method out of fear; and if you must do so, it is better to let the wound heal by solution of continuity, as we have demonstrated in other members, especially when the head of the patient is naturally free.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first type of cautery is safer and better for me; and from that, you should also choose the one that brings more benefit to health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the head cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the head there is chronic and long-lasting pain, and that is prolonged in the patient, and he uses garlic, onions, capipurges, ointments, balls, cadels, wax, and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that has not been removed or improved from those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is naturally strong; and not free and often great damage, then that cauterizer should use another cautery instead of that one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And if it is necessary to cauterize that on the surface of the head, use a pointed cautery through where the skin is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the skin and discover the bone as much as we have found, and cauterize that with a cautery in the part behind the head in the place called the carotid artery, — and that is the place where the bandage is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And let your hand be still, and do not discover the bone, because the patient will suffer great pain different from all other scalp cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will say that this cautery is in this place, because it covers the cautery that cauterizes the corners of the head and the back of the head is more subtle cauterization than that which is cauterized at the middle of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the ancient non-antiphlogistic cauterization.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is pain in the part of the head that is sharp, or pain that extends into the ear, remove the medicines that make the head better, and administer another cure, which I have mentioned in the chapters on diseases; and if this does not help, then cauterization in that place is done in two ways: either cauterization with a sharp-burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May the pointed cautery be used as you take a lancet and prick that area and apply burning ointment to its extremities, and bind it with bandages.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then incise the location of the pain in the temple with a blade that is inserted into that location and hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then apply pressure to the stopped bleeding by constriction, and leave it for three hours; then remove the lancet and treat the wound for two or three days, and then place a poultice over the location where the bleeding occurs.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that which is found when it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do that with some burning ointments which I have written about in the other treatise on burning ointments.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cauterization be done in this way: ignite a pointed cautery of the following form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a clover-shaped cautery, with the head of which is like a clover flower in which there is some curvature, and at the middle of it is a small point.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand over the location of the pain, and move your hand slowly to prevent the joint from becoming stiff - which is what has been left behind.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of blood that has been stuck due to the nature of the wound is such that it can cause death, then raise your hand to prevent the artery from becoming stuck - which is what has been left behind, so that there is no bleeding.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak the wound in salted water and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice made of ground mustard, and then heal with an ointment as soon as it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cauterize the end of the knife according to the cautery, and avoid injury to the artery in this area - which is not uncommon.
Capitol quart.	Chapter fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cauterizing an ancient wound.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an old wound with the cure we have mentioned in the previous chapter, and with the cure we have mentioned in the divisions of illnesses, and if you do not apply the cure, and if the illness does not provide the medicine or the cauterizing iron, then you should ignite the knife within the location of the pain, along a long line that is the thickness of the one we have mentioned - or which one; and place your hand with a steady and strong motion as you incise the joint and reach into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the mandible, which is marred by mastication, and that the jaw not be adhered and the nerve that causes it, and that it does not become spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the guard and care of the flow of sanctum from the artery that is abscised, which in the abscission of it is fear, and more so for those who do not know what it is and are not studious and do not spread; and leave the operation in its beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will come to remember the regimen of the flow of sanctum accident from the artery according to its own method, in its own place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this disease that does not abate with this cautery and bears the body of the patient tolerably, cauterize that in the middle loc of the head where we have reported, and cure the plague before it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter of strangulation of the artery having two points, and this is the best cauterization and more consistent.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the use of cautery for the pain of gout.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the big toe is caused by cold humors and is cured with laxatives or other treatments mentioned in the division, and the pain does not disappear, then use heat, and this is the method without puncturing, of which the following is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then apply the heat near the big toe, and move it around the entire foot as if it were rotating, or in the circuit of each one if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Slowly move the heat along the edge of the big toe, as gently as possible to avoid damaging the area.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the heat does not touch all of the big toe, and it does not improve, then cure the affected areas as soon as possible.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the use of cautery for torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture that is cured and cannot be healed except with the special methods mentioned in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the specific area due to dryness or spasm of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that area of torture with jerks and capnipurges and guarguarismes, and do not compare your treatment, then it is advisable to cauterize the patient with three cautery points: the first at the edge of the earlobe, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery in the opposite direction of the affected area, as softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The form of cauterization is that you cauterize that area with the cautery in the direction of the edge of the earlobe, a little higher than a small one above the corner of the cap, and in the temple another, the length of which should be second to the length of the said dot, and place your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the specific part of the codena is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the pointed cautery, which is particularly for the butcher, the form of which is given in the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But it is more subtle than that, which has a few parts with handles; and it is recommended to sharpen the knife on its excessive grease.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that place with that procedure until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and is treated with the method we have mentioned and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize that part with four cautery: on all the corners of his head; and with the cautery and the middle part of the head, as we have mentioned; and with the cautery in the back.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is made according to what is mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and then care for that place with that procedure.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of the cautery for forgetfulness caused by a blow.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	That large and round tablets should be given to the patient at the beginning, which are said to be strengthening.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then remove the entire cap from the patient and place it on the wound described in the treatise of plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And place some charcoal, which is the material of the cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this second, as previously mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if those wounds are healing well; and if not, then make three more cautery marks on the back part of his head, which should be placed from the part of the head closest to the neck to the part farthest from the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place the largest of the said charcoal between each cautery, and then care for the cautery as it proceeds.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you add more and the patient can tolerate it, then make the cautery in the middle; and if you add more, then cauterize that one on the two toes.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Approach the wound that needs to be healed; and use the cautery according to the shape given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of the cauterization of the perineum and the softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	That you proceed as we have said in the softening of the head and that jaws and that which we have mentioned; and then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that cautery at the middle of the head, and cauterize all the bones of the head, and cauterize on the back part of it, and three cautery on the spine of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body of three of those and the patients tolerating and the illness is strong, then cauterize that cautery with four cautery on the spine of the back, and afterwards cauterize into that which is commorit of the neck of it, and raise the chest muscle.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then approach the wound that needs to be healed, and this cautery is olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	An epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is due to fluxion.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore you should modify his brain at the beginning of the disease with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is large and tolerant of the excess of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then administer gargarisms and masterful substances, giving that for several days, good nutrition of foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then remove the patient's hair, and then cauterize that with a cauterizer at the middle of his head according to the previous method, and with another cauterizer in the back of his head, and over each ear of his head cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with the cauterizers which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body over the spines of the neck and the spines of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use an olive-oil cautery according to what is prescribed.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then use a thin cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and flaccid moisture, then cauterize those with the cautery that we have said in the one who has paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and tends towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink that which purifies his brain according to that which has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and make a small incision in a decent manner on his scalp, and then place that in the middle of his head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be lying down, and held from all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then place a liniment; and it is more suitable for an ancient sheep's bladder.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire in a measured way, the one that the sufferer says is enough when it's on them.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And approach that to the middle of their head at the circle, and lay it on them until it is dissolved.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do that for the patient every week until they are healed; or if you want, make small points on them according to the most of them, but always hold your hand with a cautery ordered: this is a special cauterizer that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And place that bandage in a soft way on the wound or in gray of linen.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of the application of water descending from the head.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared to you the beginning of water in the head by the symptoms that I have said in the division, then begin and give to the patient that water which melts the head of them, and keep that from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let that servant bathe the affected area in warm water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command that person to shave their head, and cauterize the pointed cautery in the middle of their head; and then cauterize it with two cautery points on two temples if it is the beginning of a headache, or with one point if it is the beginning of a headache in one temple.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Then incise the pointed cautery across all veins and tendons that are located below the skull; and place the cautery points in that longitudinal line on the level of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of blood flow when it is cauterized; and if you see any blood flow from there, stop the pointed cautery with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will find knowledge that is in the extraction of tendons and from their abscesses, and caution about blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes cautery is applied to the neck below two bones with two cautery points previously produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cautery of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the ancient tears of the bones are very manifest and flow through the veins and arteries that are in the location of the head and it is verified that such a thing is superfluous and flexible, then cauterize that pointed cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water coming out of the bones, and the pointed cautery at the middle of the head and two pointed cauteries on both temples, and two pointed cauteries on the neck behind two vertebrae.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if it is necessary to add, then cauterize that in all the length of the bone of the bone over the top of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the cautery of bad smell from the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that which we have mentioned in the division and do not uncover your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient three nuts; and remove the head of it, and cauterize with the pointed cautery or with the pointed oil-lamp cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then, using that pointed cautery, apply it to the two upper corners of the eyelids, just above the eyebrows, with a little bit of force.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that one.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This is the shape of that pointed cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cautery for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then apply that cautery to that eyelid with this crescent-shaped cautery; and this is its shape:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do, apply it to the two upper corners of the eyelids, in all parts, and lengthen them from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyelid.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand too hard against the cautery, but rather according to the amount that the injured part of the eyelid is stuck.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	When the eyelids are converted into the parts that are punched and pierce the eye, then use a cautery on the eyelid.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the eyelids are converted into the parts that are punched and pierce the eye, then use a cautery in those places in two ways: either with fire or with medical caustics that burn.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cautery is with fire, command the patient to look at those eyelids that are like those which are washed, while they are prolonged and equalized; and if he pushes that devil's work, then strengthen his eyelids with a bandage so that they are not maimed until the eyelids are born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are born and equalized, place the head of the patient on his back, and apply a tent over the eyelid of the patient, with a shield that is according to the figure of a murderer's knife, and the beginning of the shield near the eyelids.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place a soft cloth or cotton on the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then remove the pointed cautery that was used for this purpose.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize the area that was scratched, in small sections, using a pointed instrument, until the surface of the skin is burned and appears like roasted meat, all properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And in order to clean the wound, it is necessary that you raise the eyelid of the wound and elevate the eyebrows from the puncture of the wound.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and place it on that for three days, and then place a soft cloth underneath until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that by applying medicine until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if it returns by the hairs for any reason, and the eyelid becomes soft, then make another incision with the pointed cautery as you did before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the eyelashes are in front of the eyelid, then cauterize them where they are lifted to their natural place and equalized so that the eyelashes do not poke the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	If the cautery is not burning this, then command the patient to lift the eyelashes where they are extended and equalized, and then make a shape of paper or cloth in the form of a fan.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take some cotton and live coal, and mix those causes with water, and make that mixture into a paste; and spread that paste on the paper that is made in the form of a fan, and place it on one eye; and place the other eye on a flat piece of wood; and the head of the patient should be raised.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place it on the patient's eye and press that little and not too much into the patient's eye until the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, which is like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so, when the persistent toothache continues, the medicine and the mouth are in a bad state; therefore, when the toothache ceases, the medicine remains and wash the dirty mouth with water; and then consider if the eyelid has been lifted as it is washed from the constraint of fire or incision, where it is good; and if not, return to the medicine on the place where the medicine has not pressed and does not denigrate before your operation is equalized and contrary to the mouth.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand over the side where the code of the hysteria is located, and cure that with a definite or other remedy before it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to keep your operation that you guard the mouth with constant diligence that the medicine does not fall out of the mouth, and if the eyelid becomes soft and some cause of the teeth in the mouth, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, and properly as it was done at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the mirror.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the veins of men are varied according to their size and location, therefore your incision is made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not obstruct the correct path to the place where this art is studied.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cautery for a fistula that is in the lacrimal canal of the vein.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with that which we have said in the divisions of diseases, and do not compare your cure, then command the patient to place his head on your shoulder, and hold his head between your hands in such a way that it is neither too high nor too low.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a cotton pad or moss on the vein of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be concave, as with the form of a needle or pen knife, from one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, it is penetrating to the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to remove it with a probe.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But one who is skilled is better at the work of the trade.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And if the fistula is open, then apply the sinan and dry that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and remove the pus from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place your hand over the cautery that is burning hot, and teach the apprentice to hold the handle of the cautery from the elbow to the part of the nose, so that your hand or the patient is not burned, and then place the cautery on the gray matter of the brain and corrupt that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of the procedure, the cautery penetrates into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and leave that area for three days, and then place your hand over that and apply an ointment that is dry until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If the bones have been exposed for several days and have not healed, then pause over the sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and then scrape it according to what is appropriate in its own chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of using cauteries for fistulas that was first mentioned: insert the point of the cautery into the location of the fistula and then place a covering over it; and apply pressure on the thin, subtle part of the cauterizing instrument, which is the shape of the cauterizing instrument; and pour in the quantity of one drop of lead onto it; and hold your hand over it with good retention so that the lead does not reach the edge of the fistula; and cover the edge of the fistula with honey or water, where the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it for wonderful healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed by what we have said about the cauterizing and the cure, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a small amount of nasal spray and reduce the fistula to the nose's own location as soon as it arrives there.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of the cautery for the wound of the thumb.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Mutilations occur in the lips, and more often in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those wounds with the cautery that we have mentioned in the divisions and do not use it properly, then use the small cautery as follows:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And place it according to the sharpness of the spoon.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place your finger carefully in those wounds until the cautery reaches the bottom of the wounds.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with the cautery until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of the cautery for a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the uvula or on the palate or on the teeth, an abscess occurs and a hole is made, and it breaks, and it becomes old, and boil and it is formed as a fistula, and then you treat it and do not use it properly, then use the cautery according to the amount that is received in the fistula, and place that hot in the mouth of the fistula, and then your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and on the other side make a cut or two; and then treat it with the cautery that we have mentioned for treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the bone is fractured and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and treat the corrupted bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cautery of teeth and the softening of jaws.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the jaws are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and those medicines do not cure them, then place the patient's head on your lap, and hold the cauterizer in the shape that will come according to what you will use, and do not touch the tooth with it until you feel the heat of the fire at the level of the tooth, when the cure is completed.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then raise your hand, and repeat the cauterizer several times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient closes his mouth with salt water and holds it for an hour, and this can stop the decayed tooth, strengthen the softened jaw, and dry out the corrupted moisture.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of toothache cautery.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by coldness, or if it is frozen or worms are present, and the cure cannot be done with medicine, then cautery is performed in two ways: with a cautery of cow's bile, or with a cautery of fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	With the cautery of cow's bile, you take bile from a cow and blow it into the iron cup, then place a cloth over the end of the tent, and quickly apply the bulb, and place it on the painful tooth.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat this several times until the power of fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the bile above, and place it on the painful tooth, and place it on the ignited iron until the iron reaches the beginning of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cautery with fire is that you wait for the horn or iron to become hot, and if there is any resistance in it, and the power of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Approach the cautery in the shape it will come, and place that on the tooth and your hand inside to ensure the cautery is not broken; and do this several times so the pain remains or on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And cover that the patient bites the edge of the good border and holds it for an hour and then scrapes it; and this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as you wish with the extremity that is possible to you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cauterization of extraphules.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extraphules are of a flexible and humor-infiltrated nature and not obedient to digestion by medicines and you wish to make them more digestible, then approach the cautery with the shape it will come, having two extremities ready so that the smoke from the cautery can escape through the other extremity, and place that ignited on that abscess a time, and another if necessary for that, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, then pause the cauterization according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it open for three days and place over it a poultice soaked in boiled bread dough until it is ready to be burned by fire.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that wound and dress it with cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the needle or cautery used in such cases varies.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization of the throat and contraction of the neck.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes over the pharynx of the lung, especially when it is accompanied by coldness and fever, then immediately evacuate the patient to the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that part of the gullet in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to reach the cautery to the gullet or burn the neck of the patient, but a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that part with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the lower vertebra of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery for him should be made in the same way as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that one who is preceded by that which is necessary until he is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cauterization of the sick lung and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, and the patient does not have fever or tisic, and it is an old illness, then cauterize that one with two cauteries on the sternum in the locations where the leontz and buoytz are depressed; and another cauteri in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and let the cautery be made in the same way as before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cauterization should be made with the pointed cautery called puncta, whose form is described in the point procedure for heels.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let your points enter there; and then care for that one who is preceded by that which is necessary until he is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now let the cautery have three points, as the following is customary: you can make three cauteries of this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cautery of the nipple, which is the helper of the breasts.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the helper's nipple is dislocated due to lubricating humors and does not stop in its return time, you must replace its dislocation before it returns to that customary place, and with a small movement, move it as it should be, as we have testified, so first reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient over on his back or on his side; and raise the codena which is in the part of the nipple to the parts above the mentioned parts of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the parts below.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then use the cautery with two points; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the codena until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come out as follows from four cauterizations.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is necessary to apply pressure according to the amount of swelling, this is the method for it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some cautery needles are adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place your hand over the cautery to prevent the patient from being too hot for a while until they are comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is at the parts above and below, then do so, and then cautery over the muscle with a claw-shaped or pointed cautery, where the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of the cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is cold and moisture in the stomach that multiplies rapidly in it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment and do not confirm, then it is likely that the patient will be overwhelmed, and extend their arms and legs, and then cautery with three cauteries: one cauteri behind the chest for the amount of a claw-shaped cauteri, and two cauteris behind the back of the cauteri, until the figure of cauteri triangulated; and lengthen between those that are not adjusted to make poyredura.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the thickness of the two thickest ribs of the spine.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if the shape of the cautery is according to this form, then add it. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery in the form of a circle according to this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized at the point where this cautery frightens it: and you should place your hand on the stomach puncture according to the amount that you wish to test, and then cauterize those points with this cautery; and afterwards care for those wounds with the treatment that is prescribed before they are healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cauterization of the foot sole.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the foot is caused by coldness or moisture or excessive heat that has been displaced from its normal composition until it is cured, and the patient is treated with the remedies we have mentioned and does not worsen, then it is recommended that the patient be placed face down on their neck, and a test of three cauteries according to this form and this amount should be applied to the sole of the foot behind the hip joints, which is the position of a man lying down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let there be the space between each cautery according to its largest size, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Do not touch the patient with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of water that is adhered to the amount of the mayor part of the skin of the coda, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient stands on its feet, then let them be stretched out, which has already extended its limbs, and raised its chest.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cautery with a pointed cautery, when you are skilled and prudent in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to process too much in the cauterization, and let the skin of the entire coda be adhered so that it can cover the whole body and reach inside the intestines, because the coda here is delicate; and you know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of puncturing the abscess of the foot with a pointed cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When the swelling or abscess in the foot is felt and you want to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tunic, if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient experiences increased weight and pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the foot, the pain is greatly increased and often tires out the doctors with its treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, turn the patient on their side; and then examine the location of the abscess; and then ignite the cautery that is shaped like a needle, the shape of which has been described in the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize it with that and puncture until the entire cord is crushed, until it reaches the bone, until it escapes from there.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that by treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cauterization except for that which is prolonged in the art of medicine, and of which many bad cases are known; rather, this experiment has been tried several times on this operation, but it is still better to leave it to those who know it best.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of gout.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cautery of the razor of astrology on gout should be made in this way, and this is what you take from the long dry razor that is found, and it should be of the largest size.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and place it on the fire, and then cauterize at that location where the connection of the scapula is to the collar; and with two small cautery needles, one slightly declining to the part where the beard was left, and with two cautery needles in that area where they decline between the fifth rib and the ribs, declining a little to the parts behind; and with another cauteri in the middle of the chest; and with three cautery needles on the back parts; and with one cauteri in that location where the connection of the two scapulae is, and with two cautery needles on the sides of the chest, after the cauteri that is between the two scapulae.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not let your hand touch the cautery, but keep it in the open air of the workplace.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they also said that ancient people who used cautery knives similar to rays and ignited them, placed them in the location between the ribs, until they reached the swelling and let it be absorbed, as we have mentioned in the abscess of the lung.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this perforation, the cautery should not be used, as it often causes harm in the location of the fistula that cannot be healed.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the liver.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the liver with what we have said about treatment in the division and do not compare your treatment, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are correct, one of which is to make three cautery or four lines according to the length of the liver according to the shape of the lung cautery, whose figure has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And each cautery should have the largest part of a stick or a bit more, and the handle of the cautery should be the handle that we said in the cautery of the foot equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	Do not let your hand touch the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Another way to cauterize is to ignite the cautery with two matches, which we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the cord that is at the end of the horse's leg, which is held by the left side of the patient.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be such that it lifts the cord according to the length of the body, so that the points can be made at the appropriate latitude of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two matches, light one, in the moment when those penetrate the cord from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus four points are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with the cautery having three matches.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you should care for the cautery more than to let it remain for too many days, as it is more harmful than the other previous causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cautery for hydrocele.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	A cautery should not be used on hydrocele but directly on the prostate.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydrocele, follow the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment, then cover it with four cautery needles around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another cautery on the throat, another cautery on the chest, and two cautery needles between the spines of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the abdomen, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery in place for as long as it does not cause pain for too long.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not cure the patient with the pointed cautery too close to the body, as it could cause the wounds to become infected and further harm the patient.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the pointed cautery used to cauterize the belly is like a claw, and the one used to cauterize the arms is shaped like an olive, following its form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cauterization of the feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with hydroptic water and filled with it, cautiously cauterize the feet over the back of the foot, avoiding the area between the ear and the ring finger, and raise your hand above the cautery and do not turn it; then raise your hand, and do not return to that spot, as the hydroptic water will evaporate.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be shaped like this: And make two cauteries for the thighs, and in each thigh, make a cautery at the end of the cautery near the knee.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be as long as the cushion: and place the first one on top of the patient's body, and the other at the bottom of the cushion; and over each cushion, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Let the wound remain open for a long time so that some blood can drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then care for those causes that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of the cautery of belly wounds.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is injured and penetrated by humidity that enters through the wounds, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which is in the stomach and intestines, and is cured by those methods of healing and not by medication, and sometimes the patient suffers from a strong cauterization, then cauterize that with a great cauterization on their stomach according to what was previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauterization of the circle and with four cauterizations in the circumference of the abdomen subtly, with the clavilh subtil; and with the cauterization over the spleen on aloes great, or with two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you see the abundant humidity and the patient is tolerating it, then cauterize that above the peritoneum and on the intestines, and very strongly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal area, as this cure greatly helps with the condition.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34:
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in their natural state of old hemorrhoids or if they are caused by thick humors that have infiltrated or corrupted moisture, and they are cured with the method we have mentioned in the division and do not compare it to other treatments, then cauterize with three cauteries on the small of the back and on the abdomen for two days.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it is determined that the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is swollen, then cauterize that above the stomach with a large cauteri as previously mentioned; and with one cauteri on the finger, and with another cauteri on the navel of the patient with a clavilh, and leave the cauteri for some time underneath, and cure the patient before they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the application of cautery to abscesses near them.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you incise the abscess, then you apply the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that ignited cautery into the incised abscess, and lastly, enter the mouth of the vein through which the blood flows from the abscess.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, if they are too large, then cauterize each one after you have drained them, and apply a remedy to those wounds through which the blood flows from them while they are healing.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on anything, it is better to do so in a short time.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the application of cautery to fistulas that are formed in nature between their parts.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not comply with the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal it with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When there is an old abscess in the body's natural cavity, and it has been drained, remove the infected and corrupted moisture from it, and then apply a subtle cloth that is more suitable than the one previously used, and approach the amount of its depth with the front-mentioned cloth.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then approach the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then place that lit cautery in this abscess, and according to the amount in which it enters the cloth.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat this process with the cautery every few days or three or four, according to your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the abscess is in the body's natural cavity of the bladder or intestine, then be careful of all those locations; and do not do that unless the abscess is in a fleshy location and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the location until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the wound is sealed, and matter has been removed from it for a long time, then you can be sure that it has healed completely.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the matter has not remained in it for a long time, then you can be sure that it has either penetrated into the bone and corrupted it, or that is one of those causes from which it will again become inflamed in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter thirty-seven.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of the eyes.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there is pain in the eyes from cold or from excessive exposure to wind, and when the eyelid of the patient is closed, then you should cauterize that one above the eye with a pointed cautery, and on each eye with a clavilh of which the rememoration is known.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And if you cauterize it too much, then do so with a small delay, so that three lines of cautery will come, and they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter thirty-eight.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes weakened and softened due to friction and moisture, and the patient is unable to hold their urine, then cauterize that area on the surface of the bladder, where the urethra begins, with a pointed cautery, and also cauterize in the right side of it with another cautery.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of the patient's fingers; and cauterize that area with the lower cautery, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery should be made according to the process.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cauterization of the mouth.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When friction and moisture occur in the mouth, and it is forbidden to use pressure, and the teeth are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs due to their presence, then have that area cauterized with three cautery needles around the navel, as we have mentioned in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a lower cautery, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be made according to the process.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the Cautery of the Dislocation of the Shoulder
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture accumulates in the joints and causes pain in that part of the shoulder, and when it is stretched over the other when compared to each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is at the bottom of the shoulder.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should cauterize the patient on the part of the shoulder with a pointed cautery similar to the one used, as you will have enough to test in the circumference of that part, which is rotated, and so that the part falls into the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery used in the previous cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not present, then use three pointed cauteries or a large olive cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the cautery should be made according to the thickness of the entire skin; and care should be taken that it heals.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cautery of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the buttock and its cause is that it has been injured and become wet, the patient is cured by that which we have mentioned and not by anything else, and this is ancient. Therefore, first of all, you should remove heavy humors from the patient's body with foul or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery in that case is of two kinds: either with burning medicines or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	If the second method is known, of which one is to cauterize it over the buttock of the patient with three triangular cautery according to this form; and make them good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the thickness of the said one and if the cautery is olive oil or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some wavy lines should be drawn on the cautery over the top of the buttock so that they are four cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize the circle that precedes the form in the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, so that the circle contains and burns the entire joint.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the method of cautery in this case when pain is attached to the shoulder and does not extend into the cavity.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it extends into the cavity, then cauterize those two cautery over the cavity at the location where you wrap the patient who is in pain; and one cautery on the hollow for four called a few on the left side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery cuts through, and the depth of the cautery according to the amount of the joint's cartilage.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient wraps that the pain extends into the location called the foot, then cauterize those here where you wrap with one cautery for three points or four or more if necessary from that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient wraps pain to be left under the knee in the cavity, then cauterize those here with one cautery for the knee.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterization that does not burn the nerves or large arteries, and that for such things you are above the patient to avoid harm or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen another of those who cauterized on the scalp and burned in the cauterization, and the bed was inflamed before the tumor achieved its purpose, and fire perforated and corrupted all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then that is death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise say in the cauterization of any cauterizer, this is the method: make it similar to a circle of iron, the circumference of which is the length of one palm; and its opening should be according to the thickness of a date bone or a few.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let that circle be another third; and its space should be the amount of the thickness of a finger; and those circles should be placed in two parts; and the length of those wires should be one or two fingers, and make in those edges of iron appropriately dressed in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Approach the fire and light it until it becomes hot and produces sparks, then place it on the affected part of the patient, with the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that spot three times in a row.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; apply ointment to that spot and keep the wound open for several days; and then care for that area until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Dear sons, of this kind of cauterization we have not used it much because of the fear of its side effects, and because we have found some that affect it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Of those who suffer from it, apply it to the spot where it is affected, and then place it on that location.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Of those who suffer from it, apply it to the spot where it is affected, and then place it on that location.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between the quantity of the grossness of that is empty; and place it under and above, and place them so that they contain the second in this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand on the part of the body where the patient is lying, and cover that part with your hand; and take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that water be very hot, and keep it there for the quantity of one hour, and suffer the patient to have the mordicacio and adhustio of it — which that mordicacio has with fire — until the mordicacio ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and remove all the hot water from the patient's body.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave it for three days and place your hand on that border until the blackness of the adhustio remains, and then leave it for more days, and remove that from there; this is very beneficial.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the thigh or leg, make it stand in the part that contains water equal to that made in the body.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of cold water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and of caustic not extinguished from one part to another, and taken out in a new wave of which the part left behind is perforated by a small trough, according to the quantity that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place another wave on the bottom of the wave, and pour over that alkali and live caustic from two water containers which those take by a certain amount, and put them in the tieua ma for good compression, and leave the wave that remains from it sharp water in the part left behind to the wave poured.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another live caustic and another renewed alkali, because that is of great sharpness, which is administered in certain medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, because it performs an operation like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And it is known that some medicines are cauterized widely, such as thyme and myrrh and caustic soda which are mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Guilielmus related from an old man the operation and cure for which he was cured of pain in the eye and sciatica, and magnified it as being of that kind, and said that there was no need for other cure, and that it was cured by a certain remedy like that, which he had heard about.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be near to a certain green herb, and if it is not found green, then take fresh figs; and mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient has discharge from the adustion.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And put that in water and when the body of it is swollen, put that in the earth, because the pain ceases and it is cured.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And you should know that no one should use these medicines with a pointed cautery, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May already Escorides says that when a goat's wound is healed, the vein should be cauterized there; and this cautery should be made in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the foot's sole and the bone.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take dry goat's wound and spread it on the wool that has been heated by fire; and place it over the area where it should be stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Then repeat that, and do not stop until the sensation of pain reaches the ankle and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cauterization is called cautery of cows.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	About the cauterization of pain in two places.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain occurs in the two places due to various causes, such as blows or impacts or excessive evacuation, and due to causes similar to those, by infusion of wet and ground matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery does not cut, but only in this particular case where it is made for the emission of broken matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Then, after evacuation of the patient, give him bitter pills similar to them, which should be made on both sides in the place where the pain is three lines wide, rather than trying with a cautery or more, according to the tolerance of the patient and its virtue.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And make cauterization with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cautery needles according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of cauterization at the beginning of gout.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	It often happens to these children at the beginning of this disease; and similarly, from the beginning of the disease in children, it is said that it occurs on their structure in the joints, especially in the evenings, elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And often in the lower spine of the back and at the heels, where it begins to overcome the other spines.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you see that and want to prevent it, then use the pointed cautery that is circular according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	which holds the cautery over every part of the sacrum equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the sacrum with the pointed cautery two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be placed between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then care for the place where it is healed by what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Remember that cautery should not be administered in a state of shock that is caused by spasms of the nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of cauterization for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And so when gout is cured by the method of cure and the pain does not return, then use the cautery again.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you should cauterize that nearby evacuation in the circle of the foot joint with a pointed cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And use this pointed cautery, which has the shape of a:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain spreads to the ankles or other joints, and that does not improve, then cauterize each ankle with three or four pointed cautery needles of this type.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if these pointed cautery needles are not enough for your needs, then cauterize them and do not press too hard with your hand around the cautery before, only around the site of the injury.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain spreads to both ankles, then administer the cautery that we mentioned in its previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the legs, and it is called gout, then puncture in the circle of the tendons as they revolve, puncture in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If the pain persists in the aforementioned areas, then prick the circumference of each joint and the tip of the fingers.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain spreads to the ribs or muscles, then cauterize all parts of the helper's body.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not remove the patient from proper care and reception of medicines, for if proper care is given and the fluid is drained, this cautery method will heal, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cauterization for fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the fracture is in the fingers and the intestines are pushed against the back, and this begins to occur, then order the patient to leave their food for the day and use gentle remedies so that the wound does not open from their belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then place the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to hold their breath until the fracture is set or the intestines appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that arm to its place, and try to feel the rupture on the edge of the penis, extending the end of which is similar to the main of the circle above the divided parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then extinguish the cautery of which this is the shape of it:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is as if it were a thorn and get thorns.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery on that edge with your hand and the cautery straight, and when you have reached the edge of the penis, enter it into the middle of the glans; and if you have not succeeded in the first attempt, repeat the other method.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe the position of the intestine during your cautery, do not burn it because if it comes out under the patient, it may cause great harm or death.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Know that when you apply the cautery, do not hold the bone, do not perform your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And remember that the cautery for children should be thin according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And after three days, care for the location of the cautery until the burn heals.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And after caring for those parts, wait until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should remain on their back for 40 days before the wound is closed and the plague subsides.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And remember that the food given to the patient should be according to the length of their treatment, and that the intestine should not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And after 40 days, if you want to remove it, then give it a decent amount of food for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And if they are exhausted from labor and repletion of food and drink, and from intense vomiting, then they will be completely healed by this regimen of treatment.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and its beginning, and so that they do not heal quickly, then cauterize the rupture with a red-hot iron according to the amount of it, and that which is extracted from the coda should be mixed with the clean part of it; and cure that which we have said, and it should not be adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And it has been said that the first treatment of the rupture should be done with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than with a needle.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is placed that is on the side closest to the rupture, and another line above; and your hand should be placed with a nail cautery, but the first cautery is more slender and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cauterization of twisting.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When the limbs are injured by impact or by persistent pain that lasts for a long time and does not improve with medical treatment, then it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the pointed cautery for each member should be according to its size, power, and skill of the one using it, and location of the twist and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If it is healed by the first pointed cautery, then it is well; but if not, then repeat the pointed cautery on it; for according to custom of those pains, they are points of the member that approach the one that is affected, so that you can obtain those pointed cauteries within that patient before he is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leprous people are sometimes cauterized with a pointed cautery for great benefit, and if the type of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore when you want to cauterize that one, consider if the leprosy is common and as has been said in the division and not given, and do not do it, and fear over the patient that corruption comprehends all of his body and all of his complexion, then cauterize that one on the head: with one in the middle of the head, and with the second point behind it, turning the front to the end of the hair; and with others on two ears; and with one behind, on the back or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, your hand should hold the cautery a little inside the bone, and then displace the scars, so that the exhalation of thick vapors is relieved from there; and cauterize on the melon according to what is prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then you should cauterize those parts with the cautery that we have mentioned in the head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cautery on both ears, and two cauteries on two spinal bones of the neck, and two cauteries on the spinal bones of the back, and one large cauterization near the collarbone, and one on the shoulder, and two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on the knees, and one on each knee, and two on the calves, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of his chest; and cauterize that part over all the joints of those mentioned in the legs and feet, and over each toe of his feet, and on the soles of his feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that are on top of the ankle, do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some wounds are cauterized with a cautery on the bones of the hip and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the throat.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and more confident it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as with its others, so that the body of the patient is already stupefied.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cautery should be large or small according to the members and joints according to what is preceded by the tools of the species.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the cautery with flour mixed with honey and the other remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of cauterization of stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you should cauterize that numb member with a cautery according to the size of the member or its location.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And insert a small amount of the pointed cautery into the skin of the neck.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that wound until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes the veins are cauterized at certain points that cause pain in the hands and feet, and in the spine of the back and the eye sockets of the eyes, which move that member, and the wound is reopened.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume about that, but rather know what is written in the anatomy of the member and the exit of all the nerves that move the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the cauterization of warts that are malignant.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When warts are old and do not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you cauterize with a pointed cautery in a small amount according to the thickness of the skin of the neck until the whiteness and color of the wart is restored, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that wound with a poultice of errors and lentils with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and with honey of columbine or honey of yarrow, each part being mixed separately, and then apply a cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the Cauterization of the Cranium
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When a tumor begins to appear and one wishes to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery along its circumference as it is rolled up.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And it is said that it should be cauterized with the back cautery in the middle place; however, I have not seen this, as I fear it may cause an ulcer, and I have already seen some such cases.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is better to cauterize it along its circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with a pointed cautery.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 10.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the Cauterization of Adipose Tissue
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adipose tissue is delayed in maturation, and this happens due to excess or because of the patient's old age, weakness, or time, and you wish to hasten its maturation; then cauterize it along its circumference with a small pointed cautery, and afterwards apply a poultice to that place to hasten its maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to make a puncture with the pointed cautery, then place it in this form: and pause it at the middle point where it should enter the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is placed in that location where it has been left, so that the arm is relieved; and then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the application of a caustic.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A corrosive is a corrupting agent that moves in the body, which corrodes whatever it touches as if with fire, like dry wood being consumed by flames.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see that corrosive in the location where the pointed cautery has been applied, then place small and large nails according to what is appropriate in that location where the corrosive is present.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then apply a pointed cautery to all parts until you have removed all the corrosion and there is no cause left of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let it rest for three days, and place oil mixed with turpentine on the cauterized locations until all the scabs have been removed and all the corruption has been eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then care for that animal that is giving birth.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If three days have passed and the flesh has not given birth in a place where there is no corruption, then it is good; but if not, then repeatedly apply the cautery to that which is found in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And some acute medicines are rubbed on it, which is halfway between a cautery and medicine.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, the cautery of fire is more useful for burning pus.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already told the cure of that animal with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that which will be needed from it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of the cauterization of warts and similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Warts that are found on the parts of the foot that cause great pain and are called warts, which make the foot lame; and they are cauterized in two ways, either by fire or by a pointed cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	However, the cautery of fire is that you ignite the pointed cautery in a shape similar to a pen knife, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that contains the wart of the whole part, and should be of sharp edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that hot iron on the joint, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it stay for three days until it starts to move.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply that poultice made from wild marjoram leaves mixed with salt, and let it stay on that area for a while until that swelling is eliminated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then clean the wound with fresh meat juice until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and there are wounds on the surface of the body, especially in the thighs and feet, then you should administer in those cauteries with water, and take a needle made of iron or brass or wood, and place that needle over the joint; and then gently pull out a few drops of blood from the needle into the margin of the skin at the joint, and hold your hand, and rotate that compression of your hand from all sides, and press the edge of the needle into the skin at the joint, and find the water flowing to the end of the joint; and wait for the patient for a short while until the bite of the water reaches the end of the joint, and then remove that, because the joint will be healed from its roots.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And then they would make points on all parts of their body that are in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then they would take care of those wounds where the roots of the thorns have been removed by those things that the flesh has absorbed.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cauterization of trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When someone has a tremble because of a nerve injury, or because of fever, or for another similar cause, it is customarily said that you should cauterize those four points or more on the spines of the back, between each spine, place one cauterizer; and on their chest, and over their stomach, place an olive tree.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of that person ceases and the healing of the sick person is fastened.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cauterization of accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are abscesses with pus that are made of thick, rotten materials; then at the beginning, as it appears, it should be cauterized over all the wound opening with a thin, long, sharp cautery, the end of which is extended to the fire; or with the long, sharp, curved cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some women are cauterized in the same way at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and those who do not believe, and are torn apart by those who make these, and heal from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is best to do this before the evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 66.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cauterization of fluxes of sanct accident by incision of arceeria.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Women who have fluxes of arceeria that are incised due to the infection, or due to the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the member, and similarly, and it is difficult to remain there.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, if something happens to anyone, then you should place your hand in the orifice of the arceeria, and place your hand over that which you have said is strong enough to stop the flux of the sanct before it comes out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place the olive oil on the fire in small and large amounts, by the number of words, and blow on those until they are almost extinguished.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then quickly take a small or large probe and place it on the spot where the artery is broken, over that vein, as soon as your hand has been cleansed and restricted to that area.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And when the wound is expelled from the opening of the artery as you remove your hand and extend the probe, then take another cautery ready-made from those in the fire, and do not stop doing that until the wound is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that it does not bring another evil upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the wound in those places, and especially when the artery is large, there are four ways: either with a probe as mentioned before, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when the extremities of it are burned and the wound is restricted, or it should be tied with a strong string or bandage for firm structure, or they should be placed on medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the wound; and they should be strengthened with a cushion or compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May the one who administers a decent amount of heat and a strict restriction of clothing or by positioning of causes that burn and similar ones, does not compare but rather bears it.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If that one encounters a person who is not a doctor or has no medical knowledge, then open the indicated place on the vein of that person as we have said, and understand the great cost of entering into that part where the sane is not separated from the other parts of the plague, and over the arkeria it should not remain; and over the arkeria, sprinkle the cold water of great coldness until that sane is congealed and swollen; and cover in what is necessary for cauterization or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and punctures and of phlebotomy and of plagues and of their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that all maladies in which cauterization with fire and medicine that burns is convenient, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and the forms of the cauterizers; and we have ordered the chapters of the subdivision of the head from the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so that the one who wants to know about that can be helped by it, and for what he has asked about.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And since I am beginning that, child, you should know that in this chapter it is to be understood that what is in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for that reason, child, you should know that in the operation which is in this chapter, many wounds are evacuated, which is done with great care, because it is the life of the patient that depends on the aspiration of the vein or incision over the abscess or extraction of exsudation or purgation of the plague or extraction of a stone and its likes.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the most of them death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I have warned you that it should not happen to you in which there is doubt, because some wounds are caused by the hands of men with wounds or diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of those who are said to be near death and are left for dead, and suffer from the severity of their illness, and length of their illness, and fear of death, which means they are afraid of dying.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those who give you their case to be treated, you hope for their healing, and their illness is dangerous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore, do not consent to any treatment that comes to you in this way; your caution should be greater than necessary, and your rapidity; and do not presume any cause without first obtaining certain scientific knowledge that verifies this treatment for you, and to which successful results are attributed.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your illnesses prognosis and indication of which is converted to health, because in that case it is helpful to you for the acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, may God inspire you with His own understanding and not lead you astray, because that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished from the second chapter that precedes in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head between the feet, so that you may be familiar with what is asked about it and what is necessary for it.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of the water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You should know that this disease occurs in children due to their age and when the newborn's head presses on the child's head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some occur for an unknown cause.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this disease except in children; and to all those that I have seen it is accompanied by death, and for this reason it is left as an unfinished work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head, the water of which was full, and the head of which was always so magnificent until it could not be placed on top of itself due to the greatness of its cap, and more than the humidity increased until it died.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture or is added between the ligament and bone, or is added behind the bone on the socket.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation in that case where the moisture is between the ligament and bone and the abscess is small, then it is necessary to make a cut in the middle of the cap at one point in the latitude, and the length of the cut should be such that the moisture runs out, and this is the shape of the drain:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two cuts in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is behind the bone, then you should open the corners of the cap from all parts and let the water out when you understand that the hand is in contact with the parts and not that way to your hand.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Then make a cut in the middle of the cap at three points in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then remove all the moisture; and strengthen the cuts with drapes and feathers; and apply that which is above in oil for five days, and remove the ligament and cure the wound with tent and ointment, and strengthen the cap with equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of pus, as some are more in the occipital region, or in the back, or on the right side, or on the left; and then make the incision where the abscess and the collection of pus appear, and do it according to what is best possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause bleeding of sanctified and morbid blood to the patient through that flow of sanctified blood for its evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries that are close to the temples, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter 2.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When any wounds or bruises occur on the thighs or on the chest, and it is not appropriate to do so, and you should not compare that cure with the medicines, then this cure would be in that incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And then when you want to incise those parts that the patient's head is raised, and then rub the area with a rough cloth to make the veins appear, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with a soft cloth; and then consider where the vein is placed; and the locations of each part on the locations that are so close together that they can only be seen by a skilled person.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then place a tent over the vein and then incise each part with the tip of a sharp instrument until it reaches the bone, and that is through the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the tip behind the artery and cut it at the point of incision into the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if the length of the incision is two such adjustments, then when a vein is incised, the blood flows out in a pulsating manner, which stops frequently by itself.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the vein does not appear at the surface, then measure the width of the vein from three such measurements, and then place a tent over it, and then enter into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And the amount of blood that is drawn from the wound depends on the quantity of one unit, and it does not take more or less than that, and all of this depends on the quantity that appears to be the virtue of the patient and the expansion of the wound.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and if there is any cause of phlegm remaining on the bone, then carefully cut it to prevent the formation of an abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with feathers and strips of cloth, and carefully care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of the hernias that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an ancient or new wound becomes inflamed and painful in the temples due to excessive humidity and quality in the joints of the temples, or due to an old and similar wound that does not heal with medical treatments, we have shown in these ailments the extraction of hernias from the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the patient shaves the hairs that are on the temples; and understand the archer's apparent in the temple where it is shown to you by his own polls, and it is hidden only in a few men due to the violence of the fret.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and afterwards, scrape the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with warm water until the archer's apparent appears to you clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spoon that has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you scrape the coda with that one until you reach the archer; and afterwards, get in the opening and extract those at the highest parts until you extract the one from the coda and discover those of the tunics that are left there, from every part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, then wrap it around the end of the spoon, and afterwards, incise one part according to the quantity by which its ends were lengthened and were contracted, and do not tear it, because if it is not incised, the blood will not flow out.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then remove about an ounce of pus from the wound using three instruments.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the wound is large, then cover it with two folds of strong linen or cotton, and do not let it come into contact with the putrefaction that could lead to the consolidation of the wound and cause further drainage of pus.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the excess tissue that is between two layers; and do this at that hour or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that area with a pointed cautery until it reaches the bone, and then place it in the location of that wound.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is best to do this if the patient has fever or a scalded complexion; because cauterization is one of those causes that help to finish off the humidity, and it is therefore better in such cases.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover the extraction of the wounds with a bandage that fits well in the original location, and place it over the wound cleanly made, and then apply dry medicines to heal the flesh and wet dressings until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And while you are performing another procedure to stop the flow of blood from the wound, at that time, you should apply pressure to that wound, or use a pointed cautery, or place something in the area to stop the bleeding, and strengthen your hand to keep the wound compressed.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if for some reason you are not able to do that, then place your hand on the area where the wound is located, and apply cold water with great force into the wound until the bleeding stops, and then strengthen it according to what is appropriate.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is more appropriate for extracting blood from the wound is to cauterize the vein with this cautery, which has two points, so that you can feel both locations and pause as needed, until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that it is extended between the ends of the wound, which are not completely solidified by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two points is as follows:
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	If the knife is sharper than two blades, it is better, because if it is very sharp and approaches each part quickly, it does not cut the flesh at high speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, in those cases where there is some swelling, the heat of the fire should be applied to those parts and the flesh should be removed carefully.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and more careful.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two blades should be the amount of swelling of the said part.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment of bodies with sharp and acidic ulcers on their wounds.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the ulcers are acidic, and they are on the body of those who have wounds on their heads, and there is no cause for healing in medicine, and the face of the patient becomes swollen and has a gait as if it were that of lizards, and the wounds of those are exhausted, and they are not covered with fur, and the scales are scraped by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient aggravations in the cure of those of this operation, and they do not call that cure anything but a waste.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to raise their arms, which are on their chest, and then make three equal incisions along the length of the chest.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the chest, and the second along the length of a little movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And watch out for the incisions of the armpits which are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of the jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is three fingers, adjust it accordingly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge cloth or dry cloths, use them to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then place the sponge of two sharp ends, of which this is the shape of the incision of it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part of the temples into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise that entire cord which is between two incisions above the bone, and then make that incision move towards the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then step into this space and insert another instrument called the "cutellar", sharp on one side and dull on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp side of that instrument against the flesh attached to the cord, and the dull side on the bone, and push it into that space until it reaches the second incision, and cut all those vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Make sure that the incision continues at that point on the cord, and then make that incision move into the second incision.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And make sure that the same amount of blood flows out, expressing the locations of the swollen feet with a cloth.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place a piece of old cloth on each incision to prevent infection.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and apply that mixture of basilicon oil and rose oil and other things until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the cure of gravel and the stones that descend from the parts divided by the captain.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When someone has frequent gravel and stones that continue to descend, and sometimes the patient's eyes become weak and their vision is impaired, and the eyelids are ulcerated and the hairs fall out, and in the front of the captain there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, you should know for these accidents that the gravel and stones do not come from any veins but from the motas venas of the parts divided by the captain.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: that you order the patient to turn their head, and then insert a small incision at the middle of the forehead, on the side (and begin the incision from the temple on the left towards the right temple; and it should be incised through the bone; and extend your hand from the temples which are swollen due to mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry the entire wound with a dry cloth or dry cloths and then fill between the two labia of the vaginal opening with the old cloth or cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply a new poultice on the wound and oil it to prevent it from becoming an abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the abscess has decreased, then scrape out the bone that begins in the nasal cavity, and apply a drying regiment that is made of two parts of flour and four parts of colloid, mix it, and use it as a plaster to be applied on these wounds from the time of the flesh's nativity.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the cure for that which is caught in the earwax.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All the causes that are caught in the earwax are one of four species: either it is a mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, such as iron and salt, or it is a plant cause, such as cabbage or beans, or it is a fluid cause, such as water and vinegar and similar things, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when the pain in the ear or another similar cause to those causes that do not justify or believe in the ear, and pauses the ear to the sunlight, and if you see the pain, then distill some oil of viper or sage on that place, and administer the extraction of it, and make the sneezing condition, and open the nostrils for the event of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some cloths or wool around the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, which are often forgotten in these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not forgotten, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called the epicicloid subtle, which has this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten with the instrument, it is well; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with the thin needle of double sharpness.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not forgotten with that, then make a reed of aram and introduce the end of the reed into the ear tract and seal around the reed with wax and softened oil so that it is not pushed out except the reed.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then carefully extract the hardened phlegm that has accumulated with that which we have mentioned.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	However, if it is not removed in this manner, then take some warm or well-dressed cloth and place it on the affected area for a short time, and then place it on the end of the ray, and cover that area properly.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert it into the opening of the ear canal to facilitate, and then dry the ear canal from the moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not removed in all the causes that we have mentioned, then you should cut that part which has become abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cut that part is that you first bandage the patient's arm with the sephasic vein and then remove the bandage according to the method of that virtue, and then place that wound between your fingers and turn the ear towards the parts above, and make a small incision in the back of the ear where the grey matter of that part is located.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the lunar-shaped wound reaches the bone, and the bone is found, use appropriate instruments; and then close the wound at that time with speed, and cure it before it becomes healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause lies in the armpit, which is one of the glands that grow and inflame, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not follow my advice, then take a thin spatula of this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and apply it to the abscess that has fallen into the armpit.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do that when you think that the abscess has already become moistened by the vapor of the armpit, and pause it in small presses, and then extract it with nails or with a thin instrument, or with an incision as mentioned above, which is recommended for its extraction.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that enters the armpit, the patient should use a spray of sternutatory powder at the beginning, and fill the armpit with an old cloth, and then place it on the armpit where the water is, and if by that it becomes loosened, good; and if not, then take thin plates of iron and lions according to the length of the said, and calf them in the fire for a short time, and the patient should insert one of those into the opening of his armpit and strike with another iron plate on the one inside the armpit.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not stop this treatment until all the water has been expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once all the water has been expelled, you should take a piece of paper or straw and place one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until it is burned to the maximum.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then take another straw and make as many holes in it until all the water has been expelled, and discard that one with which it is said that it removes the excess stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of beasts entering into that ear, if it is a small one, you should use a similar instrument as we have mentioned in the division; but if it is a large one, which causes pain to the brain, then administer the extraction of it with great care and precision, and the cause of this is less than all the other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of worms that generate in the ear, when you treat that one with which we have mentioned in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not compare your treatment, then cover that you regularly clean the ear with a cloth.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there is any cause of worms here, then extract that sharp or thin instrument, but if there is no such cause, then take a narrow and wide needle of the following form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the thin end of the needle into the earhole in the amount that can be tolerated by the patient; then pull out the instrument strongly, and make those movements until all the worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if they do not obey your advice, then you will apply and seal in the circuit of the wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already been expressed in the treatment of worms, and look for that in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your emission is the one that you use to pour the medicinal oils into the earhole with this instrument of which the following is its form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or earthenware, narrow, in which there is a small opening, and place it on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it should be as if they are in the cavity of the catheter for containment here, where necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rag and wrap it around the end of the catheter decently, and then place some oil or certain herbs or any of these medicines in the catheter — and that is in the aurelha —, and then insert the rag above and press your hand on it to compress the temperature of the oil until it is expelled into the cavity of the catheter and the patient feels the oil dripping.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is placed in the aurelha should already be heated slightly by the fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause which you will distill in the aurelha is not too strong, because the medicines of the aurelha cannot bear that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the cure of the drunkenness of aurelhas.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some women have given birth to children from the wombs of other women who are not perforated, and this has also happened in some men, drunkenness in the flesh of the aurelha by plague or by no flesh at all in that; and this drunkenness is sometimes made in the preon of the track of the aurelha which does not know the evacuation, and sometimes in the parts before.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And when an accident occurs at the beginning of the disease, which does not understand the symptoms, it is in the most difficult positions for healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And when you understand the symptoms, cover the patient's ear with your hand and look at that.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an inflammation appearing, open this thin spatula of which this is the shape of it:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it in which the width is small, one part is sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be two leons long so that it does not touch the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the inflammation is caused by flesh in the ear or in the meat of it, then open this thin needle and puncture that vehemence before it stops all the flesh.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the inflammation is in the beginning of the ear, then take this thin needle and heat it a little, and place it in the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if the patient has difficulty breathing due to the weight of the body, the effort of lying down increases the difficulty of breathing; and be careful not to compress the nerves of the neck.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient has difficulty breathing due to the weight of the body, the effort of lying down increases the difficulty of breathing; and be careful not to compress the nerves of the neck. Then place a cloth of the second quantity of the width of the trachea, which you have wrapped in the groin, and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any other thing and insert it into the abscess and powder it over it according to the triplet, and use it. And if you see that the neck is already infected, then cut out the infected part and replace it with another one that you have wrapped in a cerot that is made of oil-soaked clay, until the abscess is healed; and cure it within that time.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if you have any blood flow, then immerse a cloth or cloth in wet water and place it on the neck, and use another cure that restricts the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the treatment of atherosclerosis that occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Atherosclerosis that sometimes occurs in the eyelids due to some humidity, and sometimes due to dryness.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, take those cotton or cloth, and cut those pieces from their edges, and place them on the affected areas according to the third method.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is pain from bleeding veins, then you should use a fine cautery to cauterize those areas.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cauterization is to make incisions and remove the dry areas when there is still some cause of the edges; and when they are cauterized by fire, those edges are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of great swelling that occurs in the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Dry areas in the eyelids are sometimes caused by some cause that is similar to swelling in its hardness and firmness, and because of this swelling it is called great swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And there is a thick layer of moisture under and above the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation in them is to consider whether the large one comes from that which appears under the eyelid and is moistened throughout its entire part; and the cause of this is the sweat.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make an incision over that area with the width, and scrape off that of all parts to facilitate its exit, and then suspend it with a thread and cut that off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	However, if you are not equipped with the incision of this, or if it does not penetrate the eyelid, then make a few small incisions. In this case, it is not necessary in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and cure that within which it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then it will not be harmed by that which prevents the oil of this from restoring that and encarning it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the large one is declining to the parts of the eyelid, then scratch the surface of those, and suspend the large one with a thread, another that you indicate for incision, and press it throughout its entire part, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, then this is not necessary in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash the wounded area with salty water; and treat the area with that which is inside to help it heal.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	About the care of the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is a gray substance that is generated in the tissues of the eyelid above, and especially in children, it aggravates wounds of those and affects their eyes; and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears gather on those.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you see those always on their faces all the time, and on their faces when they sleep; and they have swollen eyelids, which are already covered with inflammation, and imminent appearance of pus in the eye; and that as soon as you press the area with your fingers, you feel pus inside those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And sometimes the operation is performed on that which the patient places on his head and in his hand; and then place cloth on both of them and make a circle according to the quantity that it contains throughout all parts, and then place that over the other and press with your fingers all around so that pus is added in the middle of the circle, and then perform an incision in the middle of that humidity with a sharp instrument so that the incision is not larger than the incision made in flaubotomia.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the preoperative cavity that you are cutting through until you reach the arch, as in the most dispositions processes, the arch is reached through a fissure in the form of a white goose.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract those cloths that you have wrapped between the thighs, called parts of the forehead, and rotate them between your right and left hand until they are spread out.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to insert into the fissure so that the space does not reach the bone and the other side of that one.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If you do not see your arch at the beginning of the fissure, then insert a small facilitating instrument into the fissure until you reach your arch; and then extract that which we have said; and then submerge cloths in water and vinegar and place them over the area and strengthen those instruments with those powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And know that they apply salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure to prevent that which is left from that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that which has been healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an abscess occurs in the wound, then treat it with healing ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of the methods of touching the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the edges of wounds are not adjusted by natural hairs and are antiquated, then touch the wound and make methods to alleviate eyelid conditions such as frequent tears and softening of the eyelids and tissue until that which causes destruction of the wound is called tactinir of the wound, and cure it in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization; or by incision and suture; or by cannulas as I have already described.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore cover the head of the patient with your left hand; then convert the eyelid to your left hand, and if it converts, it is good; otherwise, insert a needle in the part where the hair is closest to the edge of the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate through that part, and let it be - close to the margin of the eyelid where there are no hairs, and close to the hairs, and pull the thread above the eyelid, and convert it to the right.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Approach the part of the eye where the eyelashes are located, and insert a small spatula into the lacrimal canal; then remove the foreign body and place it under the eyelid or on a piece of cloth, and hold the eyelid open with your hand, and apply pressure to the eye as if you were holding a reed.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is important to note that the figure should be adjusted according to the degree of eyelid elevation, as this varies among men, and those who require a large incision in the eyelid should have it made according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then approach the spatula over the two lines that you have held, and begin at the lacrimal canal and insert it into the lacrimal duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural eyelashes, it should be as large as possible.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the cornea, and scrape off all of it, and adjust the incision with two threads of silk or wool, and wipe away any excess material with a cotton swab, and if you wish to do this, and if not, do not worry.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And after three or four days, approach the stitches of the wounds and heal them.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the stitches in place and heal them with a wound that dries and constricts, as the eyelid is elevated by the sealing of the wound and its attachment; however, stitches are better, and therefore I will not discuss this further.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, it is important to be careful with the patient, as it is a good operation and not due to fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another method is to apply a figure similar to a leaf of myrtle on the eyelid, and then raise the eyelid at three inches separately and gather it together according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do this, take the three inches and if it is not equal, take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other needle into the larger lacrimal, and the second needle into the smaller lacrimal, and adjust the threads so that they are equal, and then raise your hand to the same height as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and heal that which is not yet healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you find an abscess on your incision or scar, cover it with a poultice and apply the same to the wound.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Some eyelids are turned inside out by their own weight, so cover them with the same thing that you used for the incision; but stitches are more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To bandage the legs is done in this way:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you should turn the eyelid and cut the figure that is according to what I have said; and then, by art, make two bands or two thin strips of them, the length of which should be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of their middle should be according to the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already incised at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add each one under the thread that remains on the edge of the eyelid, and tighten the bands of each part very strongly, and leave them for several days, until the skin dies by the constriction and is rejected and rots within a short time.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is late, then break the bones with a hammer, and then cure the pain until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So when it is solidified, lift the eyelid and do not prick the skin.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make cannulas that you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width, neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of raising needles in the wound with a needle when the skin is tough.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the needles are not natural, tough, sharp and painful, then perform the operation in such a way that you take a thin needle and place it on a soft and thin cedar and leather, and then adjust the extremities of it and do not nail them in a subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the needles should be as much as one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you can put another thin cedar and leather next to it, and use the extremities of that if you want.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and be close to the sunlight so that your work is visible, as it is a delicate and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the eyelid at the spot that needs to be punctured, and make it penetrate quickly before it goes beyond the natural lid of the eye.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the eyelid back and insert that into the socket, and place one or two or three but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand out and insert it into the socket where the eyelid is pulled back, and place it in the natural lid of the eye.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is not pulled back, then pull it out to the parts behind it and place it on the side where you have made the incision, so that it can be pulled back from the trauma.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then close it with the eye, as you pull back and place it on the side where you have made the incision, and stitch it up and close it for two or three days, until the eyelid adheres to its natural position and heals well.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the penis is too short, then adjust a longer artificial penis than the natural ones, and elevate it so that it enters as soon as it is long enough to approach the space, and then elevate it again.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	About the cure of eczema that appears in the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When eczema appears in the corner of the eye above, and the contraction of the eyelid occurs when it is turned upwards, to the right or left part, due to bad consolidation of the eyelid or drying or cauterization, and this eczema is called leporina, and whether it is natural or accidental, it is caused by bad consolidation of the eyelid or drying or cauterization, or by similar causes.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation in this is that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it in that which is between those a cloth of lint, and tie them together when they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not use treatment that dries out the causes of which it dehydrates and constricts, because if you do that, it will return worse than at any other time without fire having been used.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in those of causes that soften like fenugreek, and apply the water in which they are soaked and mixed with them, or use a solution of vinegar, which should be liquefied with some oil, and submerge it in that mixture, and cure it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you pierce everything that is not consolidated according to the form in which fire has been used at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have mentioned is nothing but a certain correction of ehalixacrati that does not return the form of the place according to what fire has given.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of ehalixacrati that is made in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ehalixacrati that is made in the eyelid, which is not named vertadierament ehalixacrati; and it is of nature, another accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidents can be caused by wounds or cuts or burns or other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of the operation is that you take a needle in which you make double thread, and place it on the flesh, and make it pass from the lacrimal of the left eye to the lacrimal of the right eye, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh to the parts above the needle and pinch it with the needle, and insert it into a wide space.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the figure of the eyelid returns as it was before, good; otherwise, take the rag and place it in the damaged figure, and convert that into an eyelid, and make both wounds on the side of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And make the ends of both wounds into two angles of the incision, which you made when they meet, and make an angle of them when they come together to form their figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek letter alpha: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then place the flesh on that side where the amount of blood loss is less than from the other side, which is called the palm.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with thread; and cure those with the medicines that we have mentioned for softening and the poultices within which they should be healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you have to make incisions or sutures or cauterization, then cover the flat incision on the skin of the palm according to what is prescribed.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the poultice between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the sermon on the cure of incisions when they are above or below, that it should flow during the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of incisions, and that is in the form of various shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the craftsmen always prepare everything in any way that is possible to do so within which they make return the figure to its natural form, or near to that, and the patient according to what suits the operation and the tools in the best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in men who have the eyelid stuck underneath the eyebrow, and is prohibited from facilitating movement and their natural works, then you must insert the extrusion of the ray behind the eyelid, and raise it to that, or extend it to the eyelid.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you insert the adhesion into a thin space, which is not with the sharpness of the incisions, having obtained a small one so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remain the space that does not leave the eyelid at its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should excoriate that adhesion with the facility by which the eyelid is returned to its natural form and that all adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put salt water in the eyelid with which you wash; or distill it in sunflower oil dissolved in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the swollen area of the eye, place a piece of cotton soaked in albumen on the eyelid, and apply the third day's use of remedies to consolidate it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	About the beginning of a nail and the elevation of flesh from the lacrimal bones.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You should know that a nail has two kinds, either it is nervous, similar to a fine, hard substance; or it is not nervous, similar to white mucus, which when touched, often takes the form of a pustule, and is then removed and the pustule is not left in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And the special cases do not begin until the larger lacrimal bone covers the eye and prevents light and movement of the eyelid.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	If the worker performs the operation at the beginning of it, then the patient places his own head in the lower position, and raises the eyelids of it, and with your hand lifts the eyelid, and collects the nail from the pustule and extends it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert it into the horn of a cow or a buffalo or a cow or a similar animal, or of strong hair, or double the tip of the needle gradually and place that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and tie it firmly with the nail; and extend that to the parts above, and excoriate the skin on the side of the nail which is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then continue that with the needle into the back of the patient.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you insert the romanent into the space of the lacrimal duct with a thin needle or small forceps, and remove the flesh of the lacrimal gland so that it does not continue to produce continuous flows of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And also some other methods of the nail on the sunken or firm part, as we have said, and then extend that to the space of the lion which is the shape of this:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that you do not touch the corneal tunica in it and that it does not break, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Approach the beginning of the wound with a small amount of salt or honey mixed in, and let it enter into the other side; and then care for that which has entered to ensure that it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not too tense and you cannot insert the needle, nor does it stick to that part of the toe, then this type of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed as it would be with a bandage, and it is recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that part, then you begin by opening the patient's thigh and taking a thin lancet of sharp acuity according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with thinness.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is thinned and contracted and begins to rot in that part, then let your urine flow into the wound made with salt or honey mixed in, and cover the wound from the other side.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until all that is in it has been removed, but if the opposite pus is not in the wound, then let it enter into that part, and then care for the pus when it begins to heal.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And repeat your operation until that person is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	If the lacrimal gland is causing great discomfort, it should be suspended with an onci; and incise one part of it, but do not completely remove it to prevent tears from flowing.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a warm compress over the lacrimal duct until that person is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	About the incision of certain glands and about that which is born from flesh adjusted in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some flesh is born in the wounds of certain people, and it is over-padded until it covers the pupil, or it approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the parts deformed and it is assembled like a balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation is performed by the patient lying on their back; and then open the wounds of that person and gather all that flesh with an onci convenient to that, and that with a forceps or a hook; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until all is finished with the incision, and guard yourself from the wound that you do not descend that which is your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And place your finger, which we have recommended to use at the tip of the needle, or small forceps, which are used to collect the form of the intestine as it approaches this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then, when your incision is completed and the entire cavity is filled with flesh, sprinkle salt on it, or apply a powder made from rosemary and similar to corrosive medicines, and place a piece of cloth soaked in album (egg white) over the wound until it is ensured that an abscess does not form.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause for alarm and the wound is suspected to be infected, and you fear an abscess, then lance the wound and treat that abscess with whatever remedy cures that abscess, and repeat it during the operation until it is healed, and similarly treat the flesh that was affected in the wound of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, if you cannot cure the wound entirely by natural or accidental means, then use iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you are sure that that member has suffered that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the collection of pus in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus comes out of the wound, which are considered as blisters on the wound and prevent the surgeon from performing their operation, and they reveal the wound after a long time.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider whether the wound in which pus is present is strong and if there is another disease besides pus, then collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And if you command the patient to hold their head in your hand, and suspend those veins with an onion or two according to your judgment; and that onion should be of soft duplication in this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two onions gradually in a cloth according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then collect those veins with soft forceps, with softness, and wipe away the san hour by hour until those veins are again visible from the wound and are rolled up.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to harm the wound at its extremities; and if your operation in the morning delays the sunrise, and you have a firm reason in your operation that you do not incise only those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed the procedure, then dilute the green vinegar or rose water to maintain the sharpness of the instrument that was used.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	However, if it is not possible to collect all of it at that time, then apply the entire amount of the remedy that reduces the pain, and leave it on for several days until the pain is soothed and the risk of infection is prevented.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the process after the wound has healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the form of forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On reducing hernias to the nasal cavity.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When treating hernias with a cauterizing or sharp medicine that has not healed, do not insert into it, but rather make an incision over the pus to promote its maturation and remove all the moisture within it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then use this instrument to remove it:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And if it is known that the hard head, and it is made of iron, and the cap is redone with a nail that has been punctured by a lima or aliskalfati for a subtle puncture (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupted part of the bone, and gradually revolves it between your fingers until you know that that corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And that is done several times, and then the area is restored with drying and hemostatic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the wound is consolidated and it is in the natural flesh and the body is free from infection for forty days, and it does not recur and does not become an abscess and no accident occurs in that area, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it is not in the bone but to reduce the crack to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and that you choose from second iron or sharp medicine, and as soon as the iron is revealed, then you take a tribe according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The outer part of the iron triangle is worn out, and its end is first extended into the end with such times as such.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place that over the bone, and that near the lacrimal; and hold your hand a little away from the bone, and then turn your hand into the tribe where it enters all the bone, and that feels the patient through the sensation of pain when you touch it.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the area with astringent remedies such as those that have been shown to you.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then when the flesh and the area become hardened, the matter that was flowing to the parts returns to the nose, so that is more likely to be suppressed on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of the reduction of the elevation of the bone.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the bone projects completely and does not cause harm or reduction in the excretion, then loosen the patient, and let it follow, and place some ventozas on the neck for good success; and place a liniment on the bone made of acatra, aloe, enses, and sarcocolla, and strengthen the plaster on the bone with some powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method for cleaning the feet is to take cloths of lion's mane, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; and make those parts.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place one on top of the other according to the amount needed for the required amount.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then apply strength to those with a strong, durable cloth with a tight structure; and repeat the suction of the wounds with succession; and then remove the cloths and leave the wound straight for the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if the ligament becomes soft during the day, then make sure it is kept straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the ligament as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound has already been reduced, then apply the ointment to the feet and the bandage and the cloths until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the beginning of the elevation of the choroid layer.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the choroid layer, and it elevates and processes outside the eyelids as if by a rough surface, and it takes on the shape of a man because of that, and you want to incise it, then the operation in this case is as we have recommended, which is that you insert the needle into the choroid layer from the lower part to the upper part, and then place another needle double the size of the lacrimal duct, and make it penetrate, and leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the doubled part and lift that part of the choroid layer around the needle, and strengthen that part.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place it on the woollen cloth soaked in album of egg and oil until the thread is pulled through the eye.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for that person with that which will heal the wound where the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some of the cloths from all parts are gathered in a circle around the wound, and then pierced with a thin spatula that comes to the front of the wound, and drain the albuminous humidity, and lower the wound and insert it immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of gout.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease that is called gout is not other than the one that is adjusted in the wound, similar to descending water and is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The way to work in it is that the patient should lie on the prepared and dried bed, and then take the main herb in your hands from two parts and put it inside that place where you see the sickness arriving at the other parts, and then dry it and do not let it descend, and close the wound, and the disease will see its causes as usual.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not go down, you will know that it is a hernia.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descent is not prepared as we have said, then have the patient lie between your hands and take a thin spatula and gently lift that over the conjunctiva continuing the cornea in the eye (entering the eye), until it is removed from the body.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, when it is removed, you should distill water with cauda in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already made a fenugreek and honey mixture.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the other causes until they are healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the cure of the water descending from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which is suitable for perforating according to the speech declared, then that second.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you should have the patient lie between your hands on a cushion and hold their eye shut, then pull it strongly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your hand close to the eyelid of the left eye, if the water is in the left eye; or place your hand directly on the eyelid, if the water is in the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then place your hand directly on the eyelid, if the water is in the left eye; or place your hand close to the eyelid, if the water is in the right eye.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of your finger close to the cornea near the thickest part of the ray in the album of the eye on the side of the lower lacrimal duct, and then gently push and rotate your finger on that spot.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then insert your finger into the eye and feel that the finger has reached the cause of the water.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And then measure the length of your finger before the measurement of the space that is from the pupil to the end of the black line, and that is the corona of the eye; because you will see the pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place your hand over the area where the water is, and then throw a cloth on top of it, and if the water descends at first, then the patient should look at that part where the water was, and then wipe it with a clean cloth.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then pause for a moment; if the water is descending, then you should pause at that other cloth in front of which it has not been wiped yet.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is dry and not descending, you should easily remove the cloth, and gently wipe it with your hand palm to palm, and then dissolve a small amount of clear salt of gem in the water, and then wash that part with it; and then place a clean cloth soaked in rose oil and alum and egg white on that part.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	And those who have been used to our time have placed this instead of album of egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your hand to the instrument of the wound because of its hardness - which is one of those men whose wound is hard to heal - then you should get a spatula called the albarid, which has this form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that joint at that point, and do not leave your hand in the wound, and see if you are not doing some delicate surgery.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then perform the second delicate surgery as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must complete the complement of your work, by preparing the patient for a descendant operation that is done while they lie on their back in complete darkness, and prohibit all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place your hand on that part to make it straight and not mar the patient's head at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the bandage be according to its position by the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that in that complete darkness and extract the free fluid view, and make some observations, and then return the bandage by the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not do that at the hour of the cures or soon after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having said that, you should do that in order for the water to be able to flow more freely and strongly from the regurgitation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If an abscess occurs, then cover it with a cloth and remove the pus every day for seven days, and then apply that which causes the abscess to heal.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you should examine the patient's face and place your hand on their mouth to prevent them from vomiting for several days, which exists in the darkest part of the body.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually withdraw your hand from that place and discuss its causes with them.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you should know that in some cases, the student of vision is not excused from certain fasts, and then you should be cautious about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already learned about some of those things which are in the Arctic, and some say that a fire is made in the Arabic manner by piercing a hole in it through which the water is sucked up.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen this done in our land, nor is it written about in any of the books of the ancients; and it may be new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magic by which one can overcome those who do not know about those things.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And if the pain is caused by sharp or iron objects properly placed, and their external parts are like this triangular subtlety, the sharp end is like that one.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	About the cure of flesh in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are different fleshy growths attached to which is some cause, such as a spider's leg, or a polyp; and this disease is called polypus, which is similar to that represented by the pea.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from there, flesh cancer, black pimple, of dark color; and from there, flesh lion, not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those flesh lions that are not fraudulent or cancerous, you should make the patient sneeze between your hands and expose them to sunlight, and open their nostrils, and poke the tumor in those fleshy growths.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the parts of the foramen, and then cut through that which you have understood from those sharp spaces of one part into which you know that all the flesh has been opened; because if it is from any cause of which the incision is possible, then you should remove that with one of the thin instruments to facilitate it.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the patient has an abscess or an opening that has not healed, then pause over that area; or if it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cover and cauterize the area where the pus has been completely drained and all the cavities have been closed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then gently insert a needle into the nostril and apply warm water or oil.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is plugged and there is moisture inside the palate, then know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate after covering, then know that there is no flesh in the swollen bones of the nose to which it has not reached through abscission.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then cover that area with a soft cloth to which there is any swelling, and rub in the appropriate amount of oil or medicine, and pause between each rubbing the quantity of the said oil or medicine, and examine the patient and insert an end of the cloth into the nose to apply the ray or another cause that is possible at that time.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when that is done, bring the patient's nose close to the opening until it reaches the nasal canals, and place it over his gauze, as many children in school do with this action, and it is the same cause for those who want to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place one of the patient's extremities on his nose and the other in his nostrils, and administer a piece of raw meat to his nostrils, and do that until you know that the meat is already in the patient's nostrils.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the patient, and place in his nostrils a sponge with a piece of cloth, and do that for three days or more until the flesh consumes all that is in the meat.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, place in his nostrils a tube with a plug to keep him quiet until he is cured.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if he does not get better, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to purge the nostrils with which they are distilled oils and medicines:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make something like silver or wool, which is similar to a small open lantern, with a small bowl, and the mouth similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed canula like this with a cane, and the cannula of the instrument should be a capipurge and flat, open; to which you hold the handle at the back of it, which you use when you insert into the oil or that liquid you want from the sucs and the causes suctiblas.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this capipurge is precious: recipe of beaver, white bay leaf, ginger, salt of safra, long pepper, escafragia, and spice ana unc. as if you make from the juice of blood and of caul, and those parts are made into pillulas, and one pillula is dissolved in water, and it is poured into the nostrils of the patient facing upwards.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About the nails on the outer parts of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	When the wounds are open in the external parts of the nose, and they are magnified and filled with other days inside when it is necessary to close them properly.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	For that purpose, you should insert it at the beginning of the appearance of the wound, and suture all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place your hand or cauterizing instrument over the area where the burning medicine is located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the insertion is delayed until it is magnified, then consider if it is callous, hard, blackish color and little pain, do not touch that which is apostema crancos; for those wounds open in the area where this apostema has been inserted, they are caused by great malice on that one who had it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the apostema is of yellowish color and not blackish, and insertion is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and insert that which is appropriate, and cure the area with what dries and contracts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of sutures of the nose and lips and earlobe when continuity is dissolved by injury or similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You should know that when the continuity of one of these cartilages is dissolved, you should not perform surgery on it in this way with other men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when someone has any cause of these injuries, you should consider if it is a fresh wound or not, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures, and care for that wound until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of continuity dissolution are already separated, and each is made healthy, then you should excoriate each part of their visible skin until it heals.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen those, and over them sprinkle healing powder of dragon's blood and three-thistle, and place on the powder a disc of diachylon o of any other consolidating plaster, and leave that for two or three days, and then remove it and replace it with another plaster and care for that until the wounds have healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the surgeon add the solution of continuity or use needles as recommended in the belly suture, or add the solution of continuity with a thread as you have done and make it known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that come in the inner thighs in the parts divided.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Some boils are found in the inner thighs of men in the divided parts of their thighs, similar to hard cysts, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should turn the thighs and cut each of those hard parts, and then fill the abscess with hemostatic substance until it is strengthened, and then wash it with warm water and treat the area with what has stoptic properties until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the beginning of flesh adjusted in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Many boils are found on the adjusted flesh on the gums, which the ancients called albulus, so you should suspend that one or the one you have with forceps and insert it into its place, and leave the sinus to run or the wound.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then place your hand on the affected area, or apply other strengthening or stimulating powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If that flesh returns, then secondarily incise it and cauterize it, so that the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the reason for iron teeth.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When in the surface of the teeth of the jawbones and of the front teeth and between the gums, sharp, rough, and sometimes wavy grooves are blackened, and some yellow or green spots appear within which that corruption passes through and the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore you should scrape the patient between their teeth and place your head on their chest, and remove those teeth in which such grooves and causes similar to sand appear within which no cause has ever been found, and that is how blackness and yellowness and other colors are formed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If that is the case at the beginning of the reasoning, then it is good; otherwise, you should repeat the reasoning on those teeth on the following day and the second and the third until it reaches the final statement in which you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth require various shaped razors and different figures according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so that you know which razors are used to shave the part of the tooth that is not visible and other razors used to shave between the teeth in different shapes, and these shapes of razors should be prepared by you as follows:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	That you cure the tooth from all pain and delay in its entire extraction, because there is no cause that exceeds the length of the tooth when it is extracted, because the substance sublimates within which the extraction occurs.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May it be that when the patient is prepared to have the tooth extracted, that you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, because sometimes the pain deceives the patient and they believe it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is extracted, because we have already seen this through the operation of the wisdom teeth.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you must determine which tooth is causing the pain, and what you know about it, first scrape around the edge of the tooth where there might be some benefit, until it is dissolved from the tooth gum entirely, and then apply that to the tissues mentioned, or to fine forceps at the beginning gradually until that concaves.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then apply a large log in the strong jaws for good speech or extraction, and place the patient's head between your legs that you hold so that it does not move, and then try to extract the tooth straightly in a way that does not give more pain to the patient or cause him greater harm.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place it next to the tooth entirely to facilitate and reduce the effort of its removal as it is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or worn, then make sure to wrap that fracture and strengthen it with a thin wire so that it does not break during your construction on that tooth.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should work carefully with exquisite incisions around the entire part of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not tear it away from there, and return over the patient for the main cause of their first pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And guard yourself from doing what ignorant barbers do in their practice and audacity regarding the eradication of them, which they do not administer as we have recommended; for these practices bring great harm to people, which are more difficult than a quadruple amputation, and all of their reasons remain unchanged, or some of those, or that they extract from that with ignorant barbers have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And the eradication of it should be washed with water or with vinegar and salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is an outflow of pus, as they often do, then cut off some amount of zigy and sprinkle it on the wound, and if you do not confirm that zigy, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of forceps and holding them subtly with those that are praised for their sharpness at the beginning of a long extraction, brief and thick, so that they would not bend when performing those tasks.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And there are times when a thick handle is used until they are not bent, and the extraction tools are short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they make extraction tools from Indian iron with straight edges, and in those extraction tools, there are teeth that interlock each other and strengthen the construction greatly, and sometimes the shape of a beak of a ciconia, which is strong.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and the extraction of bones from the jaws that are wedged in.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you have to remove a tooth that is wedged in for some reason, then place your hand over the location where the jaw bone is located for one day or two until that location is softened; and then insert algestic or use extraction tools with teeth that are shaped like the beak of a ciconia or guanta, the form of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	Their outer parts were cut off with a knife or scissors.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if they do not obey you and follow your command to hold these forceps or to hold them, then you should cover their eyes and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called the atal, which is a small hook with this shape:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if it has a short thick end, make it small, and do not make it too thick so that it is not triangular.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the eye is not found, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular exterior that has some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more subtle end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you have already helped yourself with this instrument having two prongs of which this is the appropriate form following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And you will need other instruments that I will describe for the removal of teeth; because it is important to make this instrument which is shaped like an ice pick, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the triangular distal part that is too short or curved, which has some swelling, and is not thinly covered so as not to be three-sided.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And other wise men say that the tools for teeth are similar to the others.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the artisans be wise and skilled in this art, but they must know that according to what it means for them, there are different operations and various diseases; among these are the diseases for which the ancients did not say or use a proper instrument, because of their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	May it be three-sided the bone of the mandible or of the other bones of the mouth, or if it is cracked, then carefully cover it with what is convenient for the tools and the forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help you with how to do this:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is some swelling little by little, then string it or hold it in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak until the bone is completely drained; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines for this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small pustule on the bone, then prick that pustule and its surrounding black area, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	About the treatment of the most prominent teeth among others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent and not in their natural position among others, especially when they lean towards the lips or towards the most venerable women; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is not close to another tooth, and it cannot be extracted with a hook or a lever, then you should extract that tooth; but if it is not connected to another tooth, then you should insert an instrument of this shape into it, which is similar to a pig's tusk, and it should be made of Indian iron with a sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And if your insertion into that tooth takes several days due to the hardness of the tooth and it is not connected to another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a prominent tooth is exposed to the gum, then you should file that tooth with an iron file of this shape.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should be all of iron from India and the mallet; and it should be made of soft points like lima, which are made into needles, and the tooth should be sharpened a little at a time in several days for convenience, so that no other tooth is damaged or broken.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then apply lines to that area and scrape it with a razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if there is a tooth where a part is drilled and the tongue, then you should scrape that area so that the roughness of that fragment is stopped and smoothed, and it is filled completely so that the tongue does not descend or the word is not corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	About the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents happen to teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or impact, and the patient cannot bear that which hurts, and you have treated it with hemostatic medicines, and your treatment has not been effective, then for this reason do not use silver in those that are strong, because silver turns green and soon becomes poor, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And if the needle is too thin and rough according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the thread is that you take the needle and take double of it between two healthy teeth, and approach that it increases am two crookedness of the needle between two rotten, or if one or more, until the skin reaches the healthy tooth of the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And approach the sewing into the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with skill and knowledge until it is not rotten.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your stitch should be the one that strengthens the needle of the teeth that do not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And approach the excess of the needle on the outside with forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place with gesture, and convert them into those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the rotten one, so that it does not cause damage to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And approach that which is written with Roman letters.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is torn or broken, strengthen that one or those with another needle in such a way that it is always whole.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of healthy teeth and the figure of straight teeth, as follows:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done that one or two teeth return to their respective places in the mouth and are recrowned as we have recommended, and remain so.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	This is not done by anyone but skilled craftsmen and wise ones.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Sometimes certain cow bone fragments are used for the cause of teeth, and they are made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in the place where the tooth is missing, and strengthened as we have said, and remain and serve well for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	About the beginning of the ligament that goes into the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that goes from the tongue to some fragments of bone or is natural to the man who was born with it, or an accidental and accidental one that has been consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in this is that the surgeon opens the mouth of the patient, his own head being present; and he raises the tongue, and then inserts that ligament nerve according to the latitude by which the tongue is released from its recency.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or resistance in that area, and it is due to the consolidation of plague, then you should use a lancet and cut through that layer until the skin is pierced and the resistance is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to make a hole in the surface of the meat and that you cut here through armor and that blood flows from the wound.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the footprints of the incision with warm water or vinegar or warm water; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from falling back into the throat, as this could cause another obstruction.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is bleeding from the wound, place your hand over the vein; if the blood flows out, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery that suits this situation.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the other cures for the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, the tongue is swollen and resembles a small ball that prevents the tongue from performing its natural operation; and if it is not treated soon, it becomes very large and fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation for this is to open the patient's mouth from the side and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you see that it is black or dark and the patient does not feel pain in that area, then do not touch that part.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it is white and there is moisture in that area, then you should insert a thin probe into it and pierce it from all sides; if the abscess bursts during your operation, then you should place a cloth over it, which is called a sponge, until it is restricted.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until you have completed it, and wash it with clean water and salt; and care for the other treatment according to this one until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of extraction of abscesses from the breasts and that which is not in the groin and of other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess occurs in the groin, they are glands that are similar to fat, which are deformed and are called breasts, which when you cure them with what we have said in the division and is not healed, then you consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, and little pain, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of dark color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron because of the risk of infection; instead let that be matured inside, and then either you will puncture it or it will burst by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, sharp, and the root of it is thin, then that should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation in it is that you consider, giving your operation, whether the abscess of it has healed completely or if it has decreased in some way; and then seize the patient by the sun, and the head of it should be on your shoulder, and cover the mouth of it, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of it from below and the instrument is a noble one of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	If it is made of silver or aram, and it is thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then when you press that silver or aram against the tongue and it shows you the abscess, and cut over that layer, then take an onion and place it in the wound, and pull it apart as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that you pull from the membranes, and then incise it with this instrument of which this is the shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, but the outer parts of it are curved, so that the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, so that they are sharp, which should be made of iron and well-sharpened.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if that instrument is not at your disposal, then incise it with this tool of which this is the shape of it: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have incised one wound, incise the other according to this method of incision, and then guard the patient from getting wet with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the patient has diarrhea, give them a decoction of senna leaves or walnut husks and similar to those that cause stool retention, and restrict the flow of stool, then cure it within that time.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes, in the same ulcer, other abscesses or those two boils occur again, and insert them according to what I said at the beginning of two melons equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in her ulcer, the abscess tending to a dark color, with little pain, which had already closed her ulcer, and the woman was breathing straight meat, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and had already reached death if more days passed.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had become so large that it had pushed two ribs apart through two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, you should make an incision in one of its ribs, and remove that, and then insert a large portion of it, and then you should incise the part where you understand the other opening, and then cover the mouth of it, and press its tongue, and then incise the rib in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then approach him with a large piece of cloth, not from him but a few drops of blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the absolute method for that woman is to immediately start pouring water, and then apply pressure to the abscess, not stopping to incise it for a long time, and the next abscess will appear in its place, which should be incised as soon as it appears.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then apply an antiseptic and cauterize the wound, and then do this; and then approach him and do not clean what God has done to that area.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of incising an abscess when it forms.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh enters the abscess and it is long, then it is not called perpendicular; and if it is in the thick and round part, then it is called a bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it is cured with the same thing that we have said in the division, and do not compare your cure, and sometimes the abscess is still there and is subtle, then cover that which is added round; and if it is at a certain length, and is bloody, of black color or dark, and not at the center, then cover the incision of it, because in that place there is fear over the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see the second bone that I have mentioned of its whiteness and length, make the patient lie down and take their tongue with an instrument that will shape it and place the bone in the new one, and pull that one down and insert it into one of two instruments that are called tweezers at the beginning of a pair.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And be careful not to insert it further than what is naturally adjusted, because if you insert it too much, you will damage their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then use the instrument that we have recommended at the beginning of a pair, and heal it while it is still healthy.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the sight of the instrument, be careful not to use it, and use the cauterizer's head in their mouth, and take some of the water that we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and hold it close to the patient's mouth, and pour it into the concavity of the instrument that has this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The patient's external opening of the cavity in which the medicine is placed with the cavity of a spoon, and place the instrument of the medicine on the wound, and the patient turns their head to the side to prevent saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person from entering into the wound due to the intrinsic medicine, so that no cause remains on the wound of that person.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Then place your hand with the medicine on the uvula for the space of about an hour until that wound is denigrated and soothed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a small piece of cloth and wrap that over the end of the spoon, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the spoon with the cloth into a small canula through which the cloth adheres to that canula, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound, and leave it there for three days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to repeat the medication, repeat that medication and then perform cauterization by wiping around the small wound in the border of the bedding, and modify that which is within the circle of the medication, and wash it with cold water, and cure it from further inflammation with an embrocation, and give gargling remedies until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This type of treatment is safer than the beginning and longer than fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some wounds are cured with that which is more subtle than cauterization and the beginning, which is cured with subfumigation in this manner: take camphor, hyssop, origanum, rue, scicados Arabic, camomile, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes or some of them in a bowl, and they should be submerged in very hot water and boiled; and the bowl should be well washed with decent water, and there should be a trough above the bowl where an instrument made of aram according to this method is placed; it should be made of silver or aram.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And if the patient's tongue is in the middle of their mouth, before the steam reaches the uvula over the uvulae, before the uvula becomes blurred.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And if it is necessary to repeat this cure while it is dry, and keep in mind that you should not perform this cure at the onset of abscesses, because it would make the abscess worse, and do not do this, but rather declare the diagnosis of the abscess carefully.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument present, then take a cane and place a piece of charcoal in the patient's mouth, because the charcoal prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of thorns and of what sticks to the wound and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Things stick to the wound or thorn of a foot or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then remove that which is visible from those, above which the cat's eye is placed, rather than using an instrument to lift the tongue, so that it can be declared what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which is not visible and is hidden in the throat, make the patient vomit so that the food can be degraded in the stomach, because often the cause of the throat ailment is removed by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of bread, a cracker, or a piece of dry bread; or takes a sponge of sea sponge and soaks it well with wine, and applies it to that place, because when it reaches the location where the spines and are extracted, it is often removed.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And more often take an eel and soak it well with wine, and cut it into pieces and extract it; or take a porcupine and soak it in water and extract it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if those causes are not removed, then use an instrument of the following form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if it is a small one, and on the outside of it is its cavity, which you can enter into its mouth for convenience.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And if it is raised up in the air, and you guard yourself from the touch of its bones of the neck, so that it does not engage with you or the spike, or what that doctor puts on his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But if the patient allows that entry, by his knowledge of the location of the adjacent cause and puts it down, and pulls his hand with the instrument in it, all this according to the quantity that is prepared for him before he gets tired.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of blood attached to the gallbladder.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the gallbladder blood is treated with what we have said in the division of the cure and not with comfort, consider it in the gallbladder of the patient at sunrise, because you have understood the tongue of it with the instrument that you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	If you see blood, remove it from that place using a small needle or thin instrument carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to remove that, then take a concave canula and insert it into the wound of the patient, place an ignited iron in the hollow of the canula, and do this as many times (until the blood stops flowing and stays out of the wound) and keep the patient away from all water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a full wet cloth and wipe the mouth of the patient with that, and wash the mouth with that; do not let any cause stick to it, and leave the water on for an hour, then another servant will hold their hand, as the blood seems like water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	And if the recommendation is not followed, then smoke the patient with chamomile or asafetida using the instrument that was recommended for smoking in the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so in four days.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another way of performing this operation is that you take a hot iron in which there are coals ignited and the iron should be covered with a cloth at one end of which there is a tube, and it should be inserted into that tube the extremity of the instrument; and then lift the subfumigation; and place the patient's mouth on the end of the canula, and close their mouth so that the subfumigation is not lost until you know that the subfumigation has reached the bloodstream, because the bloodstream quickly cools.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it is not effective, then repeat the subfumigation after some time, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salted and other foods, and not drinking water, and if necessary this regimen should be discontinued.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which blood is drawn from the vein when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps sometimes, but it has some curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The one who should be at the head of the patient, and the end of it resembles the beak of a heron, which is curved, in which there is a roughness of lime, so that when something is understood, it does not leave.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the speech on the recognition and cutting of abscesses.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are special swellings, of various kinds, according to the memory of them, one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are different in puncture and cutting of them by various methods, one of which is for the kind of abscesses that are metays; and because of this, they understand about the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the places where the abscesses occur in the body, such as the abscess on the head is different from the abscess on the buttocks; and the abscess in the fleshy part is different from the abscess at the joint; and each of them has its own incision for operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	Moreover, some abscesses that are not to be pierced until their maturation is approaching or completion of them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other abscesses that should be pierced when they are ready, and not before their maturation is complete, such as abscesses that are near joints, when an abscess approaches a joint, the cause of which is in its vicinity, and often corrodes the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a major member, and if you delay piercing it until it is matured, it will spread to the major member; or it is near the anus, so pierce it before it is matured; and do not pierce it until it is completely ready for discharge, but only the one that is near the anus, so that it does not cause discharge from the abscess and is extended to the parts of the anus, and is made a fistula, or that it is made in the term of the abscess that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May you know the time of puncture of the abscess, and do it when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is ripe when the swelling of pain and the cessation of fever, and the decrease in pain and pulse, and the increase in the head of the abscess, and the other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you know that the puncture should be made in the place below the abscess and from the cure of the elevation.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should be made quickly through the long of the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the legs or feet, and in the locations of the armpits, of the cords of the nerves, of the arches; and at the back, in all equal places where it does not reflect; because in those that do reflect, use puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in fleshy places, it is customarily said that you should not make the puncture until it is confirmed by digestion according to the complement; because if you puncture that denant aquo, it prolongs the body of the poor and of much sordidness, and greatly endures the lips of him so hard and the depth of him.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	If the abscess is not perforated according to the width of the flesh or bone, or according to what the member needs, or according to that which the member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if you administer small punctures, in large abscesses, make a large and wide opening or deep section according to the difference in size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses where you want the cord to be incised and tied, when it is done as if a lance and a sword were used, as in the case of tropical ulcers and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that have incised sections with three angles; and of those that are in the form of a leaf of myrtle, as in the case of abscesses of the joints.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those that are in the form of round and crescent sections, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	If the one you are dealing with is not like those, then make a shallow puncture or just flatten it.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, do not be afraid to pierce it, so that all the pus does not come out at once; take a piece of it, and on the next day, take a larger piece, and do this repeatedly until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is very young, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or elderly and in decline, since the animal spirit becomes more veteran and resolved at the exit of the pus, and often the patient dies, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be very careful with this chapter, and avoid your puncture in the place where you puncture these abscesses, so that you remove the infections and consider whether the infection of the abscess is few, or it is a flat section, then you administer the drugs of him or of an ancient remedy; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the puncture are much, then avoid that you pause mechanically in each place until they meet together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if a part of the tendon is removed from the abscess or hollowed out in that area, then cover it with a piece of old or new cloth made of fabric, just like when you have treated wounds or cuts, their moisture; and strengthen that by the third day; and then proceed to treat that and cure the wound with the ointment that comes from the saliva within three days.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If there is an outflow of pus during the operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar in those same cloths, and place that over the location of the flowing pus, covered with wadded cloth.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the outflow of pus persists, then cover it with a regimen and cure, and powder those that have been recommended in various locations of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the winter time, and the location of the abscess is near the nerves, then cover it with powder and oil of caution, and place those over the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is in summer, and the wounds are fleshy, then cover them with ground pepper mixed with water and vinegar or with wine and oil, and all of this should be applied before the next clean day, as we have said, and then remove the abscess and clean that area and administer to it whatever is appropriate for its healing within the time it takes for it to be healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses in general, but according to the method of distinction that I have already mentioned, each abscess is cured differently by specific means.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Regarding the incision of abscesses that occur in the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	Small abscesses in the neck, and of a special kind that contain tunic-like structures that are specific to them; and their species are called nodes.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And among them are those that are hard, and of those that contain moisture similar to mucus.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those that contain moisture similar to sweat, and similar to their own; and of those that are stony, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the dry section, and in the extraction of those that do not fear, as you should extract those that do not cause resistance.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the dry section of those that you extract with an instrument in the form of which you approach it, which is called an entremo, as long as you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If that which contains is moisture, then split that instrument lengthwise according to the surface section in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section of the line B until the line G. So when the moisture is evacuated, then you scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of it all, because too many troops return if there is any cause of it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian oil, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that place and leave it until another day, because the water will corrode everything that is from that layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeat the Egyptian remedy second and third, if necessary, until you find that there is no cause for that skin; then cure the disease with the remedy until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you insert this second one in this way:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a sharp incision in the shape of a crochet, and then insert it between two lips of the incision and scrape all parts of that one, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains that one.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your lancet causes resistance, then do what I have told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, perform the incision and treatment of the abscess that contains pus according to what we have told you; and an incision over an abscess that contains pus is less painful, because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some people have such abscesses that they never get wet; the reason is that if you incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and then squeeze the abscess as hard as a deaf stone, dry, white, and cannot be washed, and if anyone touches it, it will cause pain.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other parts of the body, accidental abscesses in the head are not covered in this chapter, such as those that occur on the heads of children and must be explained by the reasons for the golden hair, but the section of all these is a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And place your hand over the lowest part of them to prevent the secretion from flowing down to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And apply the appropriate remedy for that of treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	About the section of scrofula that occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses occur in the neck and shoulders and elbows, and some occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and their causes between them, and all scrofula of these is within its own tunic, and as in the nodes and abscess of the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the specific types of these scrofulous tumors are moles, some of which are stony, and some of which contain moisture, and some of which are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	And in that one which you have seen to be of good disposition in the Tapping, the color of which is propitious to the color of the coda, and is pale throughout, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the fascia, and is not inflamed, but rather you scrape it from the dry surface of the part above the part below the line of .G. within the line of .B., and remove all of it, and extend two lips of the coda to the onci, or to the motz oncis if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is even more important that the vein or nerve is not scraped.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And the space should not be too sharp, so that it does not adjust your hand to the scrape, or disturb the patient, and that you do not scrape what is not necessary to scrape; because if you scraped a vein or fascia and prevented your operation, then pause in the place of three-sided glass or other powders which keep the flux of pus, and clean the place, and leave that inside which has paused the acuteness of the abscess and the space becomes soft and begins to be poyrida.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the bone is removed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation before you complete it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if there is any cause of other small scrofula, then explore those and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large vein scrofula, then do not explore that from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Be careful to bend that with great force and let it fall through itself so it does not harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cotton that you have already immersed in Egyptian mummy, and then care for that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you explore that scrofula completely, then be careful to adjust the two lips of the wound and cause them to heal as soon as possible so that there is no superfluity.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula, then be careful to explore its root and remove it and administer sutures and that which is called.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for the scrofula that contains moisture, make a superficial incision where you see the location of maturation in the neck, and place a pause incision at the bottom of the wound as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the incision, applying similar medicaments to those used for those, in order to corrode that which is left from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound has been cleaned, then cure that wound with a generative carn enguent until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the pus from the abscess accidentally between the toes.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients did this section in the toe, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has made that incision.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the scripture of those words.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men who have curvature, the extraction of the abscess should be avoided, as it is not done well because all the veins and the major parts of the patient are there.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or two tonsils, when the disease is not in the tooth, cut off the section of epiglottis to prevent the danger that is caused by suffocation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when you want to do that, cut off the epiglottis in three circles of the circles of the epiglottis, or four small sections for the latitude in the area between two circles by quantity, which the section should be in a cylinder, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for sectioning, where there is no flesh and the vessels of sinew from it are torn.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is afraid, then extend the gag in the throat with an onion, and then tear the gag until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of sinew if there is any cause from those.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut off the trachea second, as we have recommended; and it means over the section of the canal through the flap that is on that side and from which the thing that is in it is disrupted and for the abscess of the throat.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then, when the hour comes that is feared for this puncture, add two strips of the tongue of the wound, and place it alone on the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh not heal until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And according to Albucasis, the summary of this speech we have recommended is nothing more than that, when one has already lanced those abscesses which are in the body of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and his breath has been closed, and they have incised the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the area of the wound for some time, and he may be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that reason, commander, leave the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil of it lasts for three days; and therefore, commander, do so with the wound, and cure it within the time it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant was holding a cup and pouring some liquid into the patient's mouth, which was called a cure for them, and it relieved their breath and removed the pain that was causing it.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So you were told that there was no incision or bleeding, and the wind was still causing the pain, and it was cured before the fever passed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And the servant did not do anything if she did not feel well in her stomach, and then she returned to her usual dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now I say that there is no fear in the section of the epidural.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	About the incision on the abscess that occurs in the groin and is called a hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called a hernia of the groin is an abscess of a large size, according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And there are two types of pain, natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one, there is no cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is of two types, one of which is similar to gout, and the other type is similar to an abscess, which is caused by the obstruction of an artery, and in that case there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not make assumptions about it as with iron, but only in the case where it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that, and it resembles gout, and is not attached to any of the veins, then insert it with gout, and extract what contains the pain from the bone and bursa; otherwise, examine the whole of its being, and cure the place with what can be used for healing before it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the separation of the types of gout.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the different types of gout, I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you should be able to distinguish between a bone and an opening with some doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Then you say that an opening is a heat and fever and severe pain that enters before the boil is suppressed; and it is a putrefaction that ceases when the fever, pain, and heat stop.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a bone is not heat or fever or pain, and it counts as the lion's claw which is in the stomach proper.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And if the color of the body is second, and its beginning is like a worm and is made thus with a vacuum, whether greater or smaller, and they are according to two species, namely that they are greasy and contain moisture, and the colors of moisture are mottled, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Then, when you reach the cure of bone, remove that and inquire about that at the beginning of the instrument which is called interosseous, according to what will come its form in the chapter which is approaching this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is a matter of inquiring about abscesses and all bones, and that you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid place where you find it in the abscess, and you rotate its tips little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then approach the last step of measuring the size of the abscess, and then extract the pus and consider what is left in its footprints.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current moisture, of whatever color, is forgotten, then you insert it into the surface section as I have said in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture from the footprints of the pus, then you know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And you apply a dry cloth in the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have been taught, suspend that cloth, and excoriate the cord of all parts to facilitate it, and keep the skin or bag, if possible, over that and extract the pus from there.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that skin, and then you should take precautions against such things, and then you should extract it as soon as possible before any cause occurs from there.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If it happens for any reason, little or too much, the pus returns to its place according to the most.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you see that some small part is missing from it, then cover the area with some corrosive powders and strengthen the area, place your hand over the pus-filled abscess, and cure the other from another treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is very large, then cut both sides of it and cure that which contains it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If it comes from the opposite side, or not pulsatil, then cover and fill the area with three tablespoons of tartar that is vinegar and let that straight for two days or three until the inflammation subsides and the boil returns; then return to cutting that which remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those that are of three kinds, namely, those that are large, and theirs are movable, and those that are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The method of insertion is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The method of inserting small objects is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Small objects such as iron, wood, or sharp-edged limbs are used to prevent the instrument from slipping in the joints.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experienced, and they are called "bed-makers," and one of them is called "bed-maker.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three types, one of which is large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The method of the experienced large type:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The method of the experienced medium type:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The method of the experienced small type:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is suitable for joints, abscesses, fistulas, and boils because they are caused by bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And there are also redontz, large lions, and others like large needles that are used to sew the wounds, and they are made of bronze, or of iron, or of silver, and the best ones are when they are made of bronze.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the black plum experiment is made, which are said to be those that were opened for the cavity where they were reflected, which were reflected at their elevation among them.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of three kinds, that is, some of their long ones, and others bent, and others short, according to the amount of the amplitude of the fistula and its stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The great plum experiment form:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The bent plum experiment form:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The small plum experiment form:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the rods are of various kinds, that is, some simple ones, which have only a bend, and they are of three kinds: large, few, and bent.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their rods there are also hooks, and they are of three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those that have two bends, and they are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of their rods there are also three bends, and they are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a large simple nail, form of its length:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a large simple nail with a slight curve:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple nail, form of its length:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of an ornate large nail:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of an ornate nail with a slight curve, form of its length:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of an ornate small nail, form of its length:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large nail with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a nail with a slight curve and two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small nail with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large nail with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a nail with a slight curve and three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small nail with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels that are sharp and sharped to remove pus and abscesses, and they are of three kinds, four of which are large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the scalpel blade:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of the small scalpel blade:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The edges of those that are made with incisions are sharp, and the other edges are not sharp, but are placed in such a way that they can be used to remove the beginning of a vein or nerve, and for those it is to heal the patient and at the same time bring tranquility to the small area where the abscess is located.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of forceps, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large magda:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of the medium magda:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of the small magda:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	These are made of iron and have a similar shape to a needle, which is made of alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And the point of the needle is hidden in the edge that is punctured, and it goes to the parts where you want, as you can see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatiumis, which are hidden between the mentioned ones for the puncture of abscesses and do not pierce the patients, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of ventozas are those which are cut from the flow of pus, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of which are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are shaped like cherries, round or somewhat long, and they are thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should use these species of ventozas for large, medium, and small ones, because for those which are cut from the flow of pus at great speed in necessity, and later when you first apply them, they do not cause pain.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to cut pus in all parts of the body, and only use them in fleshy places, such as on the sides of the ribs and thighs, and on the sides of the arms, and on the breasts and belly and groin, and similar to the fleshy sides of the body.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some wounds are made by these tools, which are similar to lancets used for phlebotomy or the insertion of a vein or an artery;
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some wounds are made in the form of circles.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	About the treatment of men's breasts, which are similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some wounds are made to inflate the breasts of certain men who need this treatment due to their age, and then the breasts are inflated, and they are similar to women's breasts, which are usually distant.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to the one who has already done this, apply a lancet to those nipples in this way, from line B to line G, and then excoriate the entire area, and place a flesh-colored plaster on it, and adjust the edges of the plaster to the skin, and cure it before it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the nipple leans towards the parts behind and is softened by its magnitude, similar to the shape of the female breasts, then cut it in two pieces, similar to two semi-circular sections, each containing the other at its end, so that the major line contains the minor according to this form of the lines B and G. And then excoriate the cord, which is between two lips of the wound, remove the fatness, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary in the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you cannot complete the incision that is to be made because of the patient's restlessness and bleeding, then cover the wound with a piece of cloth soaked in corrosive liquid, and leave it inside until it eats away what remains of the gray matter, and then cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the puncturing of abscesses that come from behind the nipple.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	When abscesses come from the milk teeth, which are hard, containing a pus that is a sign of scrofula,
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	and some of them contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised along the line of the moon according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And if all that is in the abscess is evacuated, then close it with a stitch on the other side.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound is not healed, treat it with an ointment suitable for that wound until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the nodes and scrofula is present, then incise it as we have said in the section on scrofula equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the plague extends to an area that cannot be reached, then administer the cauterizing agent as we have said in that case.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the incision of abscesses that occur by archery or by vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the cast is broken, and the bandage that is on top of it is consolidated, then wounds often occur after the apostemas E the sinews by which it is known that inflammation and apostema are through the artery or through the vein: because when apostema is through the cast, it is long attached to the front of the body; and that when it is pulled off, it feels in it a loud noise.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is through the vein is returned to the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And if incision is made on this apostema, it is error, and especially in that which is after the joints, and in the elbows, and in the collarbone, and in many places of the body; and it is great, so therefore avoid that its cure be not missed, and that which is in the outer parts, or on the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But over that which is theirs through inflammation of the orifice of the cast, cut in the bandage incision in the long; and approach the incision to one side and approach the cast, and remove from the tunics within which it is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then put that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the doubled lead into two places, — which causes you to have a sharp pain in extracting two arcerias that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then push the place between two ribs as far in as possible without causing the whole to be in it, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which pus is generated before the ribs fall; and cure that one conveniently to that, before it becomes healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is due to section of a vein, then you should have your hand on that place where it is possible for you to reach the abscess from your side, and then introduce the needle through the place where you have had your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a silk thread according to what I have told you on the thread of grape4 of two parts at two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that the thread will come out, then insert the trustworthy needle into the entire abscess at the beginning of the needle, and strengthen the four threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in the middle part of it until you see that what is inside it comes out, then insert the remaining thread, and leave what is left behind.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand on the wound that you have immersed in water and oil, and administer the cure that is made with cloths and ointment until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Such as the abscess that occurs in the joint and vein, and similarly, the abscess that occurs in the nerves when it occurs due to their impact or excessive work, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is done in the most common places of the helpers or the ankle, or in any place where there are many joints.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And if the abscess is large and resembles the color of the other body, and it is in the major parts of the patient, and when it is stretched by violence, the patient feels a similar shock.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And if the abscess is not attached to the front of the body, and for this reason it is left alone, and it is blackened throughout and does not go to any part or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be pierced with iron, because it would likely cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But those that are in the head or on the forehead should be lanced with a needle.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if the abscess is small, then use a forceps and cut off that part.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then hang it with an inch of thread, and scrape that part, and remove it; and place the wound on a bandage, and cure it within so that it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	About the incision of an abscess that occurs in the mouth and also occurs in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	When some men have moles in their bellies and other parts of the body, which are called fungal because they resemble those that grow on the heads of certain people, the reason for this is subtle; the head of those who have them is large; and the lips of those who have them are already converted, and they are of those who are small, and they are of those who are very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in his belly there were two parts that were more like fungal growths, and there was no difference between those who were white, of small reason.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those were turned inwards and were inflamed, and moisture ran from that time on.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I inserted those and again in one foot, 18 unciae deep, and the other 6 unciae deep.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation at the insertion of theirs is that you consider whether the patient is humid, and the color of the skin is white, humid, of subtle reason; then you insert it with a narrow spatula, and in your presence cauterize it in the fire, because more fungal growths are expelled by the section of it; and if you find the section, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient becoming agitated and afraid, first take a sharp knife; then later, take a strong bandage that we have mentioned earlier, and apply it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust it in the wound of the knife; therefore, do not cease to strongly bind the large wound in the leg until it is completely cut and falls off by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	However, if the wound is very large, there may be some cause for fear and panic, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	However, it is possible that you cut off the intestine of the patient, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then care for it until it is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to cut the intestine that is of dark color, thin texture, and regular appearance, for that is cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And if you find any signs of cancer, do not hesitate to remove it immediately.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the cure of hernia at the umbilicus.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Hernia at the umbilicus is caused by various reasons; either by a fissure in the abdominal wall, through which the intestine or hernia comes out; or by a swelling that blocks the blood vessel or artery, as it is called; or by constipation.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is by a fissure in the abdominal wall and the intestine comes out through the tear in the skin, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the body; and the pain is severe, and appears in different positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is by the protrusion of the intestine, then the position of that is like that which we have mentioned before, with greater diversity, and when you press that with your fingers, it disappears, and returns; and very often it is in the same place, and is a great sign of the need to introduce baths and hard work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is by moisture, then the pain is severe and does not disappear when you press your hand on it, nor is it tightened or swollen.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is for pus, then apply these signs to the wound to make it disappear or decline.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is for meat, then the pus is heavy, large and hard, and it forms in a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is for humidity, then the touch of it is like a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider whether the elevation of the navel is due to swelling from pus, or from a vein, or from humidity; therefore, it should be prohibited from treatment, because in that case there is fear and panic as you were taught in the chapter where he mentioned the abscesses from pus and from veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the elevation of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then command the patient to hold their own belly, and be standing extended; and apply a tent around the entire umbilicus, and command that it be held between your hands on top of the belly, and wrap the space wide around the umbilicus over the place you have properly placed the tent; and extend the mat of the abscess to the parts above the ankle; and apply a strong or weak bandage and the manner of tying the bandage.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then approach the edge of the abscess that has spread over the skin and insert the said needle into that place and try to puncture the intestine; if you have not done so before or do not do it through the skin, then you extract the pus and push the intestine to the parts inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the intestine, then take that thread and insert it into those parts and remove the excess of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is against your surgical skill or vein, then circle that thread, and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them strongly in those two places and insert two needles around the abscess in a crisscross pattern, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and let the wound close on its own until it heals; or insert that which is thin and can drain, and then cure that which covers the wound with a poultice that will help it to heal.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the abdominal prominence is made of flesh and no matter in it or by moisture, then cover the abscess with what we have said and remove the pus or the moisture, which you find in it, and then care for that wound with what you have and what will heal it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 43.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of the neck.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, about the neck and in what manner one should be treated with medicines, and that it is squishy in it, and the cure is done with iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that the neck generates in the greatest and most careful treatment of its cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancients said that some tumors in the neck are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, such as a tumor on the neck or in the cushion and similar to the members, all of which should be removed, and more so when they begin small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, do not try to remove it yourself, because you cannot heal from that or I have not seen another, nor that it has reached that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in them is as we have said, that you precede and lay the patient down and purge them of black bile some times, and then stitch it up, if found to be manifest.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation in which they are located, and prohibit them from eating any food that could cause a reason for their operation. And then examine every part of the body thoroughly until no cause is found for their operation.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood run, and do not stop it again, and expose the wounds, and clean the blood completely with your hand or with an instrument that is possible among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you have contrary wounds of large blood in the beginning of the vein or artery, then cauterize it before the flow of blood stops, and then care for it with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 44
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure of hydrocele.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already mentioned, in the division, about the species of hydrocele from water, and the symptoms of each species, for the treatment of this disease with our medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the one that is cured with iron is only the species of urethritis alone, and it is not close to iron for the species of tympanites or the species of hypogastria, because that is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this species of hydrocele with your medicines and do not continue your treatment, consider that if the patient has been weakened, or is another sick person with another hydrocele, such as in the lungs or stomach and similar to those, then be careful not to treat it with iron, because there is fear of that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient of great virtue and this is not another disease but hydrocele only, and not in children or old people, then the method of the operation for this is that you lift the patient between your hands, and give it to the exact position of its belly with its hand, pushing the water to the part behind the penis, and then take a sponge according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two sharp parts long, from the sharp extremity with a spatula; but rather it should be in some way short and gradually, so that in the operation it does not pierce the intestine, and that it does not lead to that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider whether the generation of hydrocele is due to the intestines, for it is customarily believed that you should make the section along with the umbilicus for the length of three digits behind it, on the right side of it above the peritoneum.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydrocele is due to a fault in the intestine, then your section should be on the left side of the umbilicus for three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of hydrocele is due to a tumor, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not make your section over the side on which you want to place the patient, so that the excess does not flow to that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce the instrument through the entire incision, and insert it into that section, and elevate your hand between the codex and the spatula, and you excise that; and if the quantity of one finger or so.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then approach the incision into the abdomen until it reaches the space where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or of fine iron, to which at the lowest part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and it is shaped at its end by the method of the pen, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of it there is a ring, which when the instrument reaches the water, you should immediately remove from the instrument, and then evacuate the water in small quantities, because if you evacuate too much at once, it may cause great harm to the patient due to the resolution of their spirit animal, or accidents occur to them.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	And then evacuate the water according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what means to you the dispositions of the patient's body, the virtue of their foot, and their goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and retrieve the liquid that causes this, which is usually held back by the cord that you recommended to pierce that second one in that way.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the instrument on the other side if the patient tolerates it, and remove a small amount of liquid, and do this for several days to prevent fear, and be careful not to let too much liquid out.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	However, if you are afraid of the patient and let out a large amount of liquid, then cure that part with sand burial, and apply a moist cloth on it, and expose it to sunlight for a long time; and cure that part with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize the stomach, and the mouth and the tongue, and the extraction of the liquid, according to what I have said before.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	About the treatment of children who were born without a normal urinary opening.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some pregnant women give birth to their children from the womb of their mother, and the head of the child does not pierce (or is straight or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, if possible, perform the perforation as soon as it is born with a very thin needle according to this form.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And place your hand on the straight one and tie it with a thin needle for three days or for four days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when you want to urinate, it remains in place and urinates; and then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not place the needle, it is possible that the urine that passes over the area does not clean this wound.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	And the one from which the straight one is, should be treated with a thin needle as we have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	And in those in which the straight one is not in its place, it leads to, the cause of which is that from those, the one that is born and the straight one is pushed by the end of the head of the child so that it cannot urinate at the parts below, until the child raises the child above; and it is not at birth, because then the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and it is a malady due to lack.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation is that the patient should lie on their back, and then extend the head of the knife towards the left hand of the operator with great forceful extraction, and insert the tip of the knife into the second part of the intestine, as if it were the point of a pen, so that none of the parts are cut, so that the intestine comes out like the knife and falls into the second part of the intestine after the operation.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation for hemorrhage, four things may occur; and pause at that point where you remove the blood, and cure the wound until it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 66.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the blister that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis and from corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Four things occur in this blister at the penis and its surrounding flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and another is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	No-malignant, cover that you hang with a thin thread and cut the one that is inside that one; then place it over the part that is submerged in Egyptian salve; and then apply that, cure the wound with the salve until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the wound is malignant, of a blackish color, then cover that which you administer with a pointed cautery at the beginning and end of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the wound is on the prepuce of the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the wound is in the prepuce and the other part is deformed, then cover that which is inside the prepuce until it is consolidated; and then cure that deformity, for when you cure it along with the prepuce, it is not guaranteed that it will not be three-sided.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if there have been accidents in the genitals and in the black and curled prepuce, then cover that which is already discolored and which is about to become corrupted or has already been corrupted; and then apply linens over it with honey, which is pounded with flour of millet, and of wheat, and of barley, and of rice.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure that other wound until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is bleeding from the wound, then administer a silver nitrate cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	where the silver nitrate cautery is applied at two points simultaneously, one to stop the bleeding and the other to the wound when it becomes corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corrupted and destroyed completely in the moment, then you should introduce a catheter into the urethra to allow the patient to urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in those where the foreskin is intact, and it is not required for circumcision; and when adherence occurs due to inflammation or abscess) then you should excise a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely released.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove those very precisely, then you should excise a part of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and then pull the foreskin, which is thin, strongly perforated by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then gently separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a soft cloth, which has been soaked in water to prevent other germs from sticking.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then apply a styptic to stop the bleeding before it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	About the cleaning of children and the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continence as with other plagues: however, since it is part of our operation and our will, and it is properly in children, it is necessary that we assign it to the best operation and make it less likely to be lost for salvation.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, we say that the ancients did not practice circumcision at all times, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it by experiment, which is the reason why I have found that the majority of artists and barbers use circumcision and cleaning with a knife and with a needle; and they use a piece of cloth and a pin.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already tried all these methods and nothing has improved the condition as much as the use of forceps, tweezers, or a scalpel that can cut like a nail, which can remove the suture underneath, where the foreskin is attached to two tunics, and the tonics are pushed back, and for some reason, it causes secure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the method that is done for circumcision, which is done digitally, and which blacksmiths use, is not secure at the end of the member's extremity, because it often goes into its wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation, a nail, if used, can cause iron and rust to corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The foreskin of the child is short by nature, and sometimes it is not necessary to perform circumcision, and I have seen such cases.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	However, from the circumcision that is done with forceps, tweezers, or a scalpel, I have found that the best, because the forceps are of proportional size, so that the sharpness above is the same as the sharpness below; and since your hand is proportioned to two sharpnesses, and the incision is made in one time; and it is a compression of the flesh in the shape containing the foreskin of the entire part, which does not make any mistake at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first step in the operation is that you make the child mostly comfortable if it is one of those who understands a little, that you do not do anything but that you lie him on his back only, and that you let him enter the other day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make that person happy in all that way that is possible for him to receive his understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make that person be between your hands prepared, and not be naked; and hide the forceps in your hand or leave them on his foot, so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on his back and blow into the cavity, and pull that which is inside the head of the back, and change that which is added to it from deafness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the place marked on the back, and then apply a small second bandage, and then take the other end of that and put it on the wound, and then pull the other end of the bandage behind the wound, and insert it between two layers.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the neck slightly and straighten the head of the vertebra; and then slowly and gently rub the small intestine, which is better; and place powder on top of the powder and cloth over it in which is spread mugwort oil mixed with vinegar recently boiled with rosemary; and lay that over the other side; and cure that with the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	This is the shape of the forceps for delivery, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The outer prongs should not be sharp and the inner ones should be sharp, so that the ram of the claw is not injured, and the length of the two blades should be equal to the length of two handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in delivery is that too much force is used to lift the internal neck entirely, or a part of it from the beginning.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So that you extend that of your hour with your finger to the abscess in the area and insert it with the same equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your finger, then remove it with a hook and insert it there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	However, if they have been passed for three days, and that swelling which is behind the ear has become inflamed, then you should let that swell until it subsides, excoriate that area to facilitate healing, and insert the second one that you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful not to touch that area with your head.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then treat that area with the powders that we have mentioned in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is inserted too deeply, and you observe parts above, then do not insert it there.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retained urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or congealed sand, or by phlegm or flesh, and similarly to those of which we have spoken about the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and you see retention of it due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then have the patient lie on their back.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the feet of that person on their own back and extend their belly from the part below their back, and the patient should tighten their abdomen as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is pressed to expel the stone to the back parts, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if that liquid is not dissolved and it is very painful, then apply the cause to the patient, and have them administer extraction of it with an instrument called a catheter, which is made like this: It should be of silver and thin like a lion's tongue, with a thin needle at the end like a palm leaf and a sliver, in similarity to a long palm leaf.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way to extract the urine from that person is that you take a thin, flexible wire and tie it in the exit of the urine with wool or cotton for good grip; and insert the ends of the wire into the part behind the catheter, and if there are any excess causes of the wool, then introduce it into the catheter with force. Then suck the urine from the border and album of the wound.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And perform the operation on the patient lying on the table, and apply a poultice to their wound and a compress with oil and honey.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And gently insert the finger to facilitate its entry until it reaches the tip of the urethra; and then bend the finger upwards to the side of the belly; and then push the finger into that opening; and then push it into the bladder until the cause of the pain has been reached, and if this is not done in this order, but in a different way, it will cause torture.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And gradually extend the thread with the lint as the urine soaks the lint.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then remove that and perform treatment for urine, using a finger, do not stop doing that and use a finger until the bladder is emptied and the patient is again relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 99.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of bladder catheterization with the clappers and similar instruments that are suitable for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or it is constricted by scarring in that area, and you want to drain fluids and medications from there, then use the instrument called the clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but it has a small opening on its outside, which is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And there are three holes in it: two on one side, and sometimes.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning, there is a cavity in which the liquid is placed, and as soon as it reaches the second quantity that fills it, it is added, until when any cause is pulled from it, it is also pulled, and when it is expelled, the liquid is also pulled, and when it is emptied, according to how a clampcedra does in battles at sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to remove fluid from the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the liquid, and pull that liquid which is placed in the parts above, so that the liquid is pulled into the cavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then introduce the catheter into the urethra according to what we have recommended in the incision; and then apply moisture with that moisture, which moisture penetrates into the bladder at first, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the catheter that is used when the bladder is cysterized, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or latten, the head of which is round and similar to a small pen, and then the canal is inserted into the urethra.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder and place it on the moisture that you want to cysterize in the bladder, and then tie it strongly with a double thread, and boil the moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then introduce the end of the catheter into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand on the bladder with the moisture that has already entered into the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not find the bladder, then take a needle of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce it throughout its entire length; and then introduce a strong thread through those holes, as it is turned; and then attach the circle where it was also attached, so that you can place your hand in the moisture that you want to use, and observe and listen.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then bring that tool to him and make it like you did with the bladder, and express urine from your hand when the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of a stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones that form in the kidneys and those that form in the bladder, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical operation and sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone that forms in the bladder itself is the one that gets stuck in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will explain it to you in a clear and concise manner.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, stones that form in the bladder mostly go to the children; and among their symptoms is that the urine that is excreted from the bladder resembles water in its thinness, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels pain in their lower back, and then they are bedridden; and at that time, they often suffer from constipation.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And this is the cure for children who have reached fourteen years of age, and it is difficult to cure in the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In young people, it is caused by that which is between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that from which the stone is larger and the cure is less certain; And if it is small, it is opposite to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we reach the cure of that which is mentioned, apply chirurgery to the patient by removing all the wound from which the stone comes; for that wound sometimes prevents the entrance of the stone due to its examination.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place the patient's feet near the wound and press them firmly to prevent the stone from descending into the bladder, or to cause it to move to another location.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that catheter prepared between your fingers, and place the patient's hands behind them, so that the bladder is completely made to descend to the parts behind.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then approach that one and all of that one.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then immediately perform a dry section on it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not catheterize the entire length of the urethra, then cover that part which you have touched with your left hand, if the patient is a child, or with your right hand if the patient is an adult, and insert it into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And then approach the stone that is behind the part which you have touched.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually push it towards the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that part with your left hand, and expel it through the parts of the abdomen to the location where the incision was made.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press the bladder with their left hand; and command another assistant to extend their right hand above, and their left hand to remain against the cord which is behind the thighs, in part of the location where the incision was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a sharp spatula into this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And then cut through the area between the buttocks and genitals, not in the middle, towards the left side of the cushion; and let the incision rest on the stone, which is in the buttock, and make a transverse section, so that the open section is wide and narrow according to the amount that the stone is in the buttock, and not too much, because the stone can be damaged by the incision, and it loses its function.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you should know that there is a stone among them that has sharp edges and margins, so that the excrement of it is difficult to remove.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that stone there is a lion-like shape, and it is round, and it makes the excrement removal easier.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is to that one that has sharp edges and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not damaged, then cover that, or gently grasp it with a decent gesture, the end of which should be like a file, which grasps the stone, and does not slip from it; or insert the subtle instrument with curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do it on that one, then slightly increase the bore, and if you want to draw out blood, cut strongly through that with scissors made of vitriol three times.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you push the needle into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it into that; and then push a little more; and similarly do if they are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is often the case that you insert that great section, which causes one of two things to happen to the patient: either death or that they become unable to stop the continuous dripping of urine, because the place is not entirely solid.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	However, do not administer the expulsion of it until it is forgotten, or engineer in the fracture of that with the forceps inside which extracts that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with powder of aloe and blood of dragon, and strongly apply that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place this cloth soaked in oil or oiled and wet with water on it, to make the abscess burst safely.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then gently lie the patient on their back, and do not let them move until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When those days have passed, apply hot water and oil to the wound, and care for it until it is healed with daffodil and javelin water until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If in the wound an abscess occurs, it is hard and corroding, and if that is the case with the wound being in the bladder frozen, and for that reason the urine is prohibited (and that is known as the exit of the wound with urine), then enter the same thing into the wound and extract that wound, because it causes the bladder to corrode and putrefy.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with vinegar water, hot water and salt, and with everything that is appropriate, with the water that is suitable for healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover all the areas between the patient's thighs and adjust the medications that are placed on the affected area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the urethra, and it is fixed there, and urination is prohibited, then cure that with this remedy that I will recommend so that you reach section, because too many troops are used for this cure and it is accused of section; and already I have extracted it, and it is that you take a punch of iron with a flat end, of which this is the shape of it:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extramatted, sharp, fixed in a stick.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a catheter, and place it behind the urethra to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the urethra, piercing it until the puncher reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then rotate the puncher with your hand in that small stone little by little, and you pierce the opening of it until you make that from the other part penetrate; because urine is already released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then place your hand on that part of the stone that is located in the groove of the buttocks, which is often dampened by urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	However, if this cure cannot be applied for some reason that prevents you from doing so, then place two cloths under and over the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then press on the stone in that groove between the two buttocks.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then remove the bandage and clean the wound, which is done in the area.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to place a cloth under the stone, but rather to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other cloth should be placed above it, because when the cloth is removed from under the stone, the infection returns to its original location and affects the area.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that reason, when you have placed the cloth above, you must lift the infected area to the sides, or bring it back to its original position and affect the area as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of extracting stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are not commonly born.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	However, if you see a stone in one of those, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many manipulations.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman is very young and a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who knows how to describe whether the doctor has been with her when she was chaste, or if she is one of those women who have had many husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation of cauterization.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the incision over the stone in women is longer than the location of the stone, so it is necessary to make an early incision, and in that there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	However, if you need to do so, then you should take a woman who is very knowledgeable and not easily found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are not present there, then approach a skilled and subtle midwife, or present a well-dressed married woman who is experienced in the art of women's matters, or a woman who has recently given birth.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then make that person do everything you order them to do, from the examination of the stone until the beginning; this is because they should check if the woman is a virgin, then cover her and put the stone in her backside.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then cut that person off from them, and then order them to scratch on that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If they are not a virgin, then order the married woman to insert the stone into the cavity of the patient and examine the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and check that person carefully.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then cover that person gradually with the opening of the bladder to the parts below the navel, and enter the stone until it reaches the edge of the wound.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then inscribe the point of the needle on that attachment of the mattress where the patient is lying and center the stone in that part, and it should not remain under the covered part of the mattress.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the ray on that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the amount that is known to be the size of the stone that was taken from that place.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the types of stones are varied: some are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have ramps.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know what kind of stones are in that place for what you mean by that which you want to say about that which you want to say.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to draw out blood, adjust the three-pronged needle in that place and leave it there for an hour until the sinew is cut, and then return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you prepare the tools that are called for in the extraction of stones from men, so that they may assist you in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you want to expel the sanctum, and know that the expulsion of the sanctum is through the ark that is incised, then place powder on the area and stretch those pills and structure descending, and do not repeat that; leave the stone and do not remove it, for if you do, the patient will certainly die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Since the sharpness of the sanctum is given over to certain days, and the wound heals, then return to your operation before the stone is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision over hernia located.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia is not other than an accumulation of moisture in the white cavity which contains the umbilical cord of the genitals, and it is called a hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some folds are in the same belly which nature has prepared at the part of the umbilical cord, before it becomes another umbilical cord; and this is the cord of the genitals between the white cavity which we have said, and this is not other than a scar.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakening of the muscles, which occurs in the groin, where this matter accumulates, and sometimes it happens due to a blow caused by an impact on the groin.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has various colors, such as the color of it becoming yellow or red, or black, or gray, or white and thin, and that is the most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one can determine whether this water aggregation is: such as if it is in the white cheese that we have called, then the abscess gradually becomes longer and appears in the groin, where the humidity comes from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the own pancreas, then the abscess gradually becomes longer and appears as another swelling.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the fascia of the groin and the white cheese, then the pain is less.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the color of the humidity, then extract the color of the humidity from the abscess in the middle of which the shape is preceded; and according to that which is in the footprints of the middle, judge of that which is derived from it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	When we come to the care of the patient with iron, it is customary to command the patient to be bled if possible, and sometimes examine their wounds.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then lie them on their back on some reason, and place cloths underneath them.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then place yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the minister to follow on the right side of the patient, who extends their hand to one arm's length from the patient's groin and the navel of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a wide spatula and cut open the patient's groin from the middle towards the pubic bone.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the incision should be made straight and equally distant from the line of the patient's groin, until it reaches the white part of the pubic bone.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scrape that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not incise that; and your scraping should be the same as that which is suspended by the higher part of the belly and subtly examined according to the quantity possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then carefully pierce the skin with a wide perforation, and remove all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the wound with tweezers, and extend the skin at the edges; do not touch the genitals, and carefully insert the tweezers in that way that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And carefully insert the needle into it or into the feet, and more carefully pierce its thin layer, since if you do not carefully examine the insertion of it, it is not secure that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the wound processes from that opening of its skin during your operation, then when you have completed the cutting of the skin, return and carefully adjust the two lips of the wound of the genitals with stitches, and carefully care for that one as with the others until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if the wound becomes corrupted by another illness, then first tie the veins that support it, and remove the wound, and then carefully care for that one as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the water is added in two parts, then you know that two are hernias; then insert that part according to what you have done in the other equally; and if it is up to you whether it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you wipe the sweat, and enter into the sections with wool submerged in oil or roasted oil; and place another wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and spread it over two gentiles and the mirror of the belly; and place cloths and powders on top of them, and bind them with a linen cloth according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then place two cloths and fold them according to this pattern; and make the edges of the cloth that is pressed from the side or from wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the braid of the bragues, and one of the edges holds the buttocks inside the two, and the second holds the part of the pantilh, and two other edges are placed on top of two cushions and two other edges on top of two ankles, and all the structure is adjusted in the braid of the bragues.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a pointed cautery instead of natural separation; and you should take a thin pointed cautery and insert it into the groove of the ginatius, and ignite it according to our recommendation before it is discovered that the white cipher contains water, and then you take the cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then you pierce that cipher and ignite it before all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the cipher with your fingers, and excoriate it with your fingers, and excoriate it with the thin pointed cautery ignited; and insert it according to what is possible to you before you completely remove it; and be careful that the fire does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting than natural separation, and better than the operation with separation.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter resistance to the abscess at the time of separation or at the time of cauterization, or during natural separation, then you should cure whatever resistance it causes to you, according to the treatment that is appropriate for it after it is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is too weak, and does not want to undergo the second operation due to its horror, then administer anesthesia according to what we have recommended; and when you are certain that this hernia is dangerous,
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	then perform the operation on the patient lying on some elevated mattress, then puncture the abscess in the lowest part of the leg parallel to the thigh, and hold the puncture according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	and let the incision be wide enough to drain all the pus.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	and place your hand on that spot and hold it there, so that the pus continues to drain out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	and care for that area until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if resistance is encountered in the drainage of the wound at that time, then you should not puncture it unless the white cotton in the orifice of the wound causes resistance and prevents the discharge of the pus, then place a pen or instrument in the wound from which water is drawn from the hydrops, the shape of which is preceded; or adjust a small drainage tube in the pressure of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you will know that the water returns, and is replaced every few months or in that environment; and when it is replaced, then you should perforate according to that manual method, where the patient has passed their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On incision over fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You will know that in the incision over this hernia, there is a risk of serious damage to the major structures; therefore, I advise against it and consider it better to save it.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation in that place and the types of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, say that the abscesses do not occur in those places where the glands are located and are made for various reasons: either due to excessive acute pain, which is directed to the glands, or due to trauma.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the place, and it is not always dark in pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And if the abscess is very large and inflamed, of which the color is dark and does not move to it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some wounds are made by the impact of the ribs, and by the inflammation of those that already exist, or by the inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	This is known as the rupture of ribs when the pus is dispersed and comes out with the breath, and it does not cause that touch.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	This is not caused by the dispersion of any cause due to compression on those ribs.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this special one and on the others, incision can be made; and you should insert the codena of the genitals, and then stretch the skin above, and remove that from the white cipher, and remove the suspensor of the veins, and tie them, and then insert the suspensor as you remove it from all parts of the skin.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the skin is already attached to those parts and has healed, then you should remove it and insert that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is adhesion due to some cause of the hip, or between those that are between the buttocks, then you should remove all of that adhesion and cut it with a rounded incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the native flesh is in the location of the adhesion that is behind, then you should cut all of that which is from it, and extract it as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin oil infused with rose and vinegar; and then cure it with the other healing method until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the healing of hernia that is in the thighs.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The thigh is an abscess wrapped by some envelope similar to a bursa around the softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement exercise and ambulation over the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness is for fear of that which precedes its memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, they call that operation in the second type that is done first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And they say that one should place the patient on an elevated chair; and then lift up the suspensory ligament of the testicles to the parts behind; and then take hold of the spermatic cord with both hands, and extend it strongly.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert the sharp-edged space through a transverse section on the right of the veins where the veins are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scrape off all the parts where we have said in extraction of the cartilage, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place a double-edged needle in those places, and insert that one in the first of the places where we have done the incision, and insert the other one on the back of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert those in the middle place through a straight section according to the length of the bone, and extract that which has been added by the foul and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the pain with the same remedies as those used to treat other pains in which you wish to generate health by causing the vessels that do not belong to one of two generations, because it is not harmful for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if all the veins are affected, then cover the testicles with a bandage or bandage them so that they are separated from the vessels, to prevent them from receiving any nutrition from the beginning of the vessels, and that they be supported, or that they be covered so that they do not suffer.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure of enterocele.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that ends in the abdomen extending over the belly, near the angles of the waist, so that the intestines of that rupture come out from any of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the abdomen or of the intestine, and these two species occur due to various causes: blows, or from a heavy object, or from loud noise, or from raising something heavy, or from similar causes.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the cause of that, when it is due to the extension of the gout, is that it occurs slowly over time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess that enters into the bone through which the gout compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the cause of that is when it is due to the section of the gout, because at the beginning it causes severe pain suddenly; and it is an abscess that appears differently after the expected appearance, and that is due to the intestine, and the cause of that is the parts of the gout.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes it is caused by the intestine tearing through the abdomen, and this is called an enteric hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by the wind, and sometimes it occurs in the intestine wound, and it is held there, and it is due to great pain of the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain and more so when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this illness, iron is used with fear, because it causes the mouth to open in that place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation for that is to command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with your hand at parts of its cavity following his return, and then place it on his neck between your hands, and lift his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then place the string that is the string of the testicles to the parts above, and insert the string of the testicles entirely through the long; and then put two stitches in two lips of the section second when it indicates to open the section with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is second the quantity that you have possible that of that he should be forgotten.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then remove that skin which are left the string of the testicles, until it is discovered the white skin from each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you enter the your finger in that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white skin, which are left the string of the wound, and between the skin second, and solve that adhesion which is in the part behind the wound.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then use a clean cloth to cover the scrotum with the testicles, and extend the white sheet underneath it on the left side, and raise the blanket over the right side; and command the assistant to extend it and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind after the solution is completed.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And then cover the patient's thighs with a clean cloth so that there is no cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white sheet.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause, then put it on the patient's abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle that is large and thick, about 4 fingers in size, and insert it from the back of the white sheet, which is underneath the scrotum, the section; and then insert the ends of the thread that emerge from the needle, about 4 fingers, and place some cotton on them in the shape of a cross; and then tie the thread to the white sheet that we have said is behind the scrotum.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the feet and tie those with very strong tape as soon as any of the vessels that inflame them cannot transmit any cause for which no abscess occurs from here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then place another piece of tape second from the first tape, three fingers away from it; and leave these two tapes on the scrotum, which is placed behind the testicles, the amount of its size, and insert everything completely in round shape, and remove it from there.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then insert it into the part behind the scrotum, through the section of which runs the blood and urine as we have recommended in that which we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer submerged wool in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the tape that we have recommended (and some white tapes of the cipher are cauterized, which we have said to place at the beginning of the wound to prevent blood flow, because those tapes sometimes occur) and leave the tape until it falls.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the patient's breath is delayed, then apply a warm water enema and place your hand over the anus after it has been expelled.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the wound with the other cure for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	On Inflammatory Hernias.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, no one has been found who has been healed by any means of treatment.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that is visible; that is, you should apply leeches to the section above the affected area, and then dry the area around the abscess after they have been removed.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And then care for the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the Displacement that Occurs in the Ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and it shows the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not give any cause for hernias in the groin; and if you do, it is rare; and it returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	However, if the time is prolonged, it is adjusted by making a fissure in the groin before the hernia appears in the groin; and this is done because the groin is stretched, and then it becomes soft, and the area becomes inflamed and prone to infection.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure of it is with a pointed cautery as described earlier.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some cases are cured by applying a poultice in this way: the patient lies on their side between your hands, and then the area of the inflamed abscesses is cut open according to its size, about three fingers wide.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then apply a white bandage that is rolled up inside the groin before it is discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the reed and place it on the inflamed area of the groin, and press it against the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then bring the two incision wounds to the end of the thigh bone, and adjust one of those sutures on the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the thigh bone, and do not incise the thigh bone from all sides, nor stretch the intestine, nor any other cause that you know about in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you have incised the wounds, clean it and restore the wound within the time that it is consolidated; for the thigh bone contracts and is not adjusted to the elevation of the rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, as it is more likely to be beneficial.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the ligaments of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	The ligaments of the testicles are softened in some men by this that the tissues that are between them are softened, and the arrangement of it is maintained.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is in charge of the cure of the patient to make a cast on the patient's leg according to his own size, and insert the entire cast over the natural cast; and then he should adjust two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened cast in three or four places and make a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert it between the sutures; and cure by the cure of the other wounds until they are healed and the wounds close.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration is prohibited in our law, but it is allowed for two reasons, of which one is that the doctor knows how to do it when he is asked about it; and the other reason is that we have sometimes needed castration of other animals for our purposes, such as donkeys, cows, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by attrition or by sectional fissure.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case where it is done by attrition, the method of the operation is to make a cut in the animal's tail between the testicles where they are soft and thin and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those parts inside your hand before they are resolved and do not let them touch the outside.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In castration performed by sectional fissure, take the animal and hold the scrotum of its testicles in your hand without causing any pain.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then lift the suspensory ligaments, and make an incision on each side of the penis between two testicles.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then make an incision on those parts that will be excreted.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave any cause on those parts of the cipher, but make a subtle incision over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better than the one done by attrition, because attrition leaves no cause of the testicles so that the animal does not desire gout.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then cure the wound before it heals.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of hernias.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hernias in men occur in two ways: one is where it appears through the space between the testicles, and another is where it appears between two testicles, forming a lump of tissue.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some of these are in the space between the testicles where urine is present.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a special type: it is where the lump of tissue is located above the pubic bone, similar to two testicles in a man, and is connected to the front part of the vagina, like the penis of a man.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And there are three types of treatment: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary to insert these tissues adjusted inside so that the opening does not escape, and then treat those wounds with the treatment of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type of men, where there is urine in the space between the testicles, there is no treatment or operation in that area.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of lentils and meat due to causes of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Lentil soup is adjusted according to natural causes until it is ready; and some women are praised in this way until they are spread out as in men, and it is done during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you should have the excess of lentil soup on your hand or in a cup and cut it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not end at the beginning, mainly at the edge of the vagina, so that it does not become a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then care should be taken to cure those who are sick until they are healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Raw meat is meat that has not been cooked in the pot of the mother until it is filled with that, and it is often cut according to the same shape as the lentils (and therefore it was first called "badly cooked"); therefore, you should cut it like this, and cure those who are sick until they are healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is not perforated, or if it is slightly narrow.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to an illness that has preceded it, and it is caused by meat not properly adjusted or by subtle or thick phlegm.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused in the forehead of the woman, or in her ribs, or in the most superior part of her, or in the most inferior part of her, and it prevents her from moving, and from engaging in any activity, and very strongly prevents menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is gained by observing the menstruation, if the obstruction is apparent, then you should prop it up; but if it is not apparent, then you should cover it with a cloth or with a rag.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to subtle phlegm, and it is located between the two labia, then you should cut and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And place your fingers on the two lips, and then press the indicated points on the inside.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, with her legs extended, and then extend both lips inward until the delicate sphincter is broken and the opening is exposed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it on the wound to prevent the incision from becoming consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the sphincter is thick and tough, then you should incise it with a wide or sharp knife.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the opening is fleshy, then suspend it with a needle and suture it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And then apply the medicines that stop blood flow due to bites, such as honey, sulfur, and ointments, adjusted according to the amount of wound.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide-bore catheter to prevent the clot from becoming solidified.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it for several days and administer some of its juice.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it should be cured with the other treatment of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And some other accidents have occurred in the main native territory of other animals, and it is customary to treat them in this way.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is for an abscess in the neck, to the abscess in the neck that is in the main body, do not make any incision in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure of emerods and tail and red buboes that have occurred in the groin of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Emerods are appreciated from the openings of veins within which there is blood that flows continuously; and since emerods are cured thus.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the kinds of those and their symptoms, and to say that those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, it is said that when they are in the front of the greater toe and do not appear to the senses, then in those cases, there should not be made any cure with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those which are in the openings of the greater toe above which there is sensation, those are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And cover that you place the finger in the most affected area and approach it with a blunt instrument or a sharp cloth, and scrape those with the razor.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder over those from the flow of the sanctum of one of the scrapeable powders of biting, such as asafoetida and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then apply compresses to the feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of the sanctum persists, then make that in a decoction of sumac and scratches of millet grains and of walnuts and of similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take ordinary flour and mix that with honey and vinegar and make an ointment with that on the back of it.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the tooth is removed, it is good; otherwise, make two incisions and scarify the gums.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in the juice of colander or the juice of arnagloza or the juice of guarravier, and apply it to the wound; and then heal the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May the one who is of harsh regard, cover that which you have inserted from the second that I have said in them equally.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the perforation of a wound accidentally in the eye.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Special methods for accidentally occurring abscesses in the eye, such as cranc and abscess lapident and ulcers and adhubelat and erpetromens and fistulas emorroyas and raguarrias and thyl and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these diseases and the methods for those and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is said in this treatise about abscess that the greatest one is when it collects the most pus among all types of abscesses, and if you want to know how the operation for it is performed with a needle.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp with percussion and flexibility and fever, and sometimes swelling and if it catches on that sensation, then do not puncture it, and cure that which helps to mature it until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then consider whether you make the woman lie on a bed that has two mattresses; and lie on her side and adjust her feet to the part of the stomach just below the belly, and her legs are expanded, and place your hand on her breasts behind her neck, and hold quascus in a convenient position.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should follow the left side and administer the instrument with which the orifice of the greatest abscess is punctured, the shape of which will be found in those causes that will be mentioned.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you want to administer this instrument, you should place the end of it at the tip of the finger, and if any part of the instrument enters the finger, it should not be longer than the tip of the finger to avoid harming the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is longer than the tip of the finger, then place powder on the surface of the finger to prevent the instrument from entering the finger.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And place the needle that is attached to the instrument below and have the administrator hold the instrument and rotate the needle until it enters the finger.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the excitement occurs, and it is touched by the hand and the lion and moistened, then wipe that from the head of the instrument with a cloth.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the pus is evacuated, then place a bandage soaked in rose oil or olive oil in which there is some stypsis in it; and place the bandage on the wound in the finger.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place your hand on the greater trochanter and above the patella, with a clean cloth soaked in water in which worms were built.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And let it be cured in two days by applying the appropriate remedy before it becomes healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Some bandages are washed the greater trochanter and the flank in such a way that they are soaked in water and honey, and then with water in which a certain herb of liri or aristologia longa is boiled, and then return to the remedy.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the flank is injured by the bandage, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, having care that it is treated with the remedy we have mentioned in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner the fetuses are best treated when they are not in a natural position.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The necessary cause is that the midwife knows the natural position of the fetus by feeling it, and when you examine the woman expelling the parts, and she desires to smell the air, and on that side is the part, and quickly know that this part is the second natural position, and its position is on its own head, and the secondina is hanging or suspended from the umbilic.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, carefully compress the patient's belly so that the fetus does not push too hard against their head, and gently lift their head, and this is called good molding.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	If this part is not natural and not usable, because when the fetus is on its feet and the body of the patient is facing its head, and the hand of the patient is on its foot, or the foot of the patient is on its hand, or the head of the patient is on its belly, and it is strongly converted on its neck, and similar to the unusable figures of the patient.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary that the midwife be wise and skilled in all these causes, and guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you should show all the figures of those, and what engine is in those so that it means that and is on that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When it is done, it is on its head because of natural exhaustion, and that is very strong on the woman and is made at that difficult part, and sometimes the power of the patient is already weakened, then do this, or what the women had for that, and evaporate the cold from the patient with hot fomentations and humid heat.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the sponge between her legs and tear that second one, or dry it with her finger until that water is removed from there.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Press the woman's belly until the fetus is expelled.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	However, if it is not expelled, then cover the woman with a mixture of mummy powder and fenugreek powder to clean her.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, with the help of the midwife, that she be calm and do that strong sneeze; and hold her mouth and nose for an hour, so that the fetus is expelled as soon as possible.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two main parts of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then gradually reduce them with forceps.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	However, if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet off the ground, and then carefully lower the chair to the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the shaking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the hands are not turned back and the patient dies, then insert those and remove the remaining part of the body or tie the body to the patient's hand with a cloth and remove that equal part, because that man has died.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The positioning of the fetus on its back.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is lying on its back, first place your hands underneath them, then gently turn the fetus over, and then make it equal to that one, and then take one of its legs and extend it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When they are placed between the thighs, then command that person to expel it, and make that one expel it in that condition, because that man has died if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if that one is not expelled in that way, then gradually return the fetus little by little until you reach that second natural position, because that man will be born later in that way.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited to do all that we have recommended, then take some mucilage of aloe and dissolved gum, and grind everything in the mortar for good percussion, and then apply that to the woman's vagina, at the bottom of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then perform that action in warm water, until you reach the hypocandias.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When the parts behind the patient are warmed, then apply a poultice of mint and pause it on them.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When the poultice has been warmed for an hour, then apply it on a cloth, and after that, remove the mucus from the patient's mouth, and lift them up, and press the lowest part of their belly with a firm compression, which will soon relieve the pain.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The position of the patient on their backs and their hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the patient is positioned like this, then gradually engage their fingers one by one; and place the woman's hand on their neck, and the patient's feet down, and those should be on the light, and complete their hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on the patient's belly gradually, and remove that which is behind their feet from the bed before it is prepared in the lowest part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not forgotten, then take the feet of the patient and move them with great force, and slowly push that which is over the hypogastrium into the parts above until the fetus comes out.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert your hands and equalize the fetus little by little, and command the woman to expel the fetus until it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The entire length of the fetus hangs from one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It should be engineered in the reduction of its intestine, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and let her do that.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it cannot go out, then perform the jazer on the light, and shake the cushions of the patient with great force, and administer ointments that you have and recommend for mucous membranes.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the child is born, then perform that sezer on the coals, and study the reduction of its intestine, and equalize the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman vomit and command her to understand when it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	When the child's head is stretched out, his hands are on his chest and his foot is on the side of his mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	That the midwife holds the child's hand and gently turns it little by little, and that this helps.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is equal, pause over the child's belly with that which we have recommended for oil and mucilage.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And when you have ordered the child to turn little by little, then make that which you have done on a cloth and command it to be inclined on its right side, and command that it be comfortable; and make that which is to sneeze conditionally.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The outcome of the prepared child is on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the second finger of the mother is inserted into the child's anus in this way, consider, and then you insert the second finger under your nail until it is emptied of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the child is suspended by its face and neck, then you insert that which is on the umbilicus to prevent it from being held back and remaining.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then approach the patient and place him in parts where he can rest comfortably, and send the woman to bring some blankets, and let the man be brought out gently, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The death of twins or many children.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that the cause of twins or many children is unknown and varies, but this is strange and difficult to understand; however, it is a natural cause, not a living one.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, whether they are multiples or not, a second, and they are separated by the umbilical cord of each of those, and some blankets are brought out gently as if it is a child born naturally, and its position is brought out with some blankets as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if it is difficult to determine their sex and they reach the age we have mentioned about unnatural figures, then you treat them as we have recommended.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the clever and skilled woman makes that which brings facility and skill, and delay, and is intelligent according to all the figure according to what it is prepared by the engineer to save.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	The memory of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women are formed in the womb, one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and it is already confirmed that a woman aborts not until the sixth month, and another all of them, which cause is made for the sake of the glorious saints.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all such knowledge that should be in the science of the woman which is very useful for that like appearance of that, and therefore pauses to that are with that knowledge.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus, use that which we have said in the division of medicine and do not deformed it, and you should be able to use operation with the hand, therefore consider whether the woman is of sound health and not of any of the accidents by which she is feared for perdition.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is lying on her back on her side, and her head is tilted to one side and her thighs are raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The assistant holds the patient's arms or lies them flat on their back to prevent the patient's body from extending during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you moisten the mouth of the midwife with olive oil and a mixture of fenugreek and sesame seeds and olive oil.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife places her hand on those oils and mixtures, and then she inserts her hand into the midwife, and then she circles the area where the umbilical cord is in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And the appropriate locations in that: Then you consider whether the fetus is prepared to breathe over its own head, and then you place the umbilical cord on its neck, or on its collarbone, or on its mouth, or on its palate, or under its beard, or on its shoulder blades, or on the appropriate locations on its ribs, or on its hypochondriac regions.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the condition is on their feet, then in the tenthen, or in the middle of their backs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And that they hold the needle at the tip of their middle finger, and place the curve of their hand over that place between the thumb and index finger, and with their other hand, insert the needle into any of those places we have mentioned, until they reach the cause of pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and hold another needle in the same position, or a third if necessary, to ensure it is equally attached, and not extended more than straight.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And also make sure to apply it to all parts, so that the pain of this is relieved as it is done in teeth for its eradication.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And also ensure that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is held, then apply some oil to those mentioned fingers and insert those experiments and rotate those that are held.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the foot is forgotten, then move the needles to another place that is less painful; and do this until all the foot is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the wound is facing towards the other side, and it is not possible to reduce it by bandaging, then cover it with a cloth; and then remove all that has been forgotten, and insert it into the wound or at the joint of the limb or in the cavity.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And if you do this in the other leg and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the bone is large, or if it has pierced the bandage in the wound, or if it is lodged at the top of the bone, then insert between the mentioned spikes and cut the head and remove the bone, or use an instrument called “alundat”, which will be shown in the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Similarly, if the bone is large by nature: and then insert it into the algemat or use an instrument called “alunda” as we have said; and then remove the bones with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is exposed and bandaged with the wishbone, then cut through it so that the moisture that is in the chest is drained.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated and does not involve obesity, then you should first insert the needle as soon as it is possible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the belly is pustular or in the hydrocele, then you should prick that hole through which the fluid that is in it flows.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the foot is above the feet, then the direction of the fluid should be towards the mouth of the vein, and the direction of the fluid should be towards the mouth of the vein.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If it is compressed, then you should remove the cloth that has been wrapped around your hand, and then prick the belly and chest through which that fluid flows.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are still intact and the needle returns, then you should insert your right hand; but if the mouth of the vein is blocked, then you should insert your hand into the wound, and surround that area with the other hand, and then push that hand towards the mouth of the vein, and then insert one or two inches, and then push it into those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed by an abscess that occurs to her, then do not force it on her; in front of her, then administer an injection of warm, heavy humors.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply ointments; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the wound is on the same side as the ribs, then if possible, it should be sharp: and it should be administered that which we have said in the living wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be scraped and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And do not leave any cause of decay in the second part.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer that which we have said about the cure of abscesses that occur to the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if blood flow occurs, then suspend in stanching waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in the belly of whom was dead, and then another burning method was undertaken, and then a dead fire was the other wound.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens to some people for a long time that an abscess forms in their belly; and when fire is inserted, it begins to tremble and shake.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	I was called to treat him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed some strong-adhesive plaster on him for certain causes, and after several days, I removed one bone, and after a few more days, I removed another bone; and he was very surprised, as there were no bones in his belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So I continued to drain the wound, and extracted some bones, which were existing in its many dispositions, and had been there for a long time, correcting the little piece of flesh that remained.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	I did not affirm that it was strange, but rather that in this case, there is knowledge and help for this that the skilled physician uses to cure it.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of tools that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of a spoon is used for this purpose:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a forceps in which the free limbs are grasped, with two spoons at the ends of two handles.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this spoon should be more subtle and less restrictive, and it should be made of wood or bone.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each handle should be two fingers wide and the thickness of each should be one finger; and the length of each is a palm and a little more; and in the middle of the two handles, there are two adjustments of that measure, which are already fixed, of which the length is the greatest of one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the spoon so that they can be grasped when you turn the two prescribed spoons.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to that one more subtle and less apparent:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	A tool made of wood or bone should be used according to the similarity of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the end of its two additions, there are sometimes attachments, and the length of those attachments is one palm, and the width of each is two digits.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the larger one, then you place your hand on the right side of the patient's feet hanging down, and open that which is between their thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then raise your hand with the instrument that is similar to forceps according to the amount that you want of the approximation of the mouth of the larger one before the midwife makes it so that you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of a trumpet, which the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	A form of a trumpet, which is blown into and played by the person.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	A form of an amisidato, which is held in the large hand.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps at the end of which there are teeth sometimes, and some devices are made long according to this form, sometimes, with teeth like those of a saw, which is sharpened and held.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of administration for the potion:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of administration by drops:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of administration by two drops:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps that holds the tooth to be removed, with which the head of the child is held:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spatula that holds two ends, with which the head is amputated:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two flat spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercised, and as they multiply in species and are prepared by the craftsmen, it is more likely to be used in their operation and less to be done by women for their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should not neglect any of these instruments, whether they are old or new, because the need for them is unjustifiable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	For extraction of the second tooth:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second tooth is held, command the patient to hold their own tongue, and then make that sound condition, and strengthen your hand on their mouth and on their nostrils, and if by force it does not succeed, well enough.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	If not, then take an egg and pierce it on the cover, and place it on the herbs burning at the mouth of the mother, with calamint and rough and salt and camomile and Arabic spices and cassia lignea and santonica.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the egg, and place it on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then place a cannula of cannula in the mouth of the mother, and hold it inside so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Then do what we have said, and the second time it is removed quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this treatment is not effective, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in a solution of althea, and place it on the abdomen and gently rub it the second time, and when it has found it, then take it and extend it little by little if it is attached to the pregnancy of the mother, then place her second hand as we have recommended, and when it has found it, remove it little by little according to what the mother does not bear the attraction vehemently.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Between the legs, it is helpful to move them in a way that allows both sides to be easily accessible.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	Then adjust the amount of attraction so that it obeys and avoids adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is covered, we have already recommended the cure by sneezing and the medication of the eye with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	However, if all the causes that we have recommended are not forgotten, then you should keep in mind that whatever is issued from it to the mouth of the mother should be applied to the cushion of the woman, and then crystallize it with the ointment and tetrafarmacon; because that will dissolve it and make it forgetful.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	However, when it is poured, the bad air is raised to the head, and the stomach, and that harms the patient; therefore, you should administer sub-fumigations and appropriate measures to that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	However, the ancients already knew about the sub-fumigation of nitrous and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an instrument that a woman is subjected to for the retention of menstruation and the secondinea.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of lead or iron.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the narrow end should be placed under the stomach and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that one while that fumigation is consumed and repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the treatment of the unperforated anus of a child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When newborn children have unperforated anuses and the anuses of which are already thin and swollen.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then ask the midwife to prick that swollen part with a sharp needle; otherwise, prick that part with a sharp needle and make sure it does not touch the skin.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place that wet linen on a fire and cure that part with the liquid that is inside it until it is softened.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it will be swollen again, then place a tube in the rectum for a few days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it has happened that the abdomen is filled with pus or an abscess; then make sure that this consolidation is incised, and then cure it with what we have said about the cure and the plaster.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the treatment of fistulas that arise from there.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that arise from the lower part of the abdomen, which are often large and occur near the anus or in the space between the thighs.
E es una fistula o motas.	And if it is a fistula or a moat.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And if that location is ancient and the humidity causes white or thin pus to flow from these fistulas, and some vegans are in them.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by the fact that they have an outlet and are often used by the patient for defecation, and some worms use them as an exit, and many are not from those verms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some vegans are in the space that penetrates into the bladder, and into the meat of the penis; and some that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the navel.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in the case of a fistula that penetrates into the anus and does not penetrate, you should insert your finger into the anus, and gently probe with a soft or iron instrument through the fistula when it is not turgidity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is turgidity in that case, then gently insert the soft or iron instrument through the fistula until you feel the instrument or the hair on your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel it at all or there is no cause of constipation, vomiting, or diarrhea, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then treat it accordingly.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meatus of the urethra, then the meaning of that is urine from that place and prohibition of that so that the place is not damaged by medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the joint or into the bone and causes pain in the circumference, then it is clear that the instrument should be inserted through there if there is no turgidity in the bone, and pain in the circumference of the part; and that from there it should not be prolonged too soon; and that it is not valid in that medicine, nor is it consolidated with oil.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the cure of those is trial and error of the folly of doctors over which they are stopped.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In those that are not penetrating and not ancient, healing is expected to be successful according to what you recommend, and that which has already been tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands above him and raises his legs into his, the cushions should be inclined towards the patient's belly, and then insert a probe, or if it is in the fistula tortuosity, until you know the location where the probe passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that sensation is felt by the patient around the abdomen, then cover that you insert your finger into the abdomen.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already inserted and discovered to be penetrating, another thing that you feel between your finger and that sip or flesh, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and therefore do not experiment in that, because it is not in that cure, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	May it be said that this is a disease that affects certain men more than others.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medication for which one hopes for a good outcome in this is that you ignite a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously described, and introduce that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the hole; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those tissues adjusted by the fistulas are completely burned, which resemble a quill of a goose.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then care for those wounds covered with bandages until all those tissues that have been burned are completely healed; and then care for the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, it will not be healed at any time by another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the tent goes inside, and does not penetrate into the part that is in the anus, and between that and the tent which is covered with flesh or caul, and the fistula is in that place where the surface of the intestine begins, then dry the intestine from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if the drying of the tent is in the fistula, and it is inside the fistula until the end of the drying reaches the place where the end of the tent is, and through the tent it is released and catheterized.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulated parts that are assembled to a pen needle and do not have any cause for them.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if blood flows between you and your operation when you have incised those parts, then milk that is and from the lesser instrument use cauterization with fire or sharp medicine, because the cauterization with fire adjusts good doses: it adheres to those parts adjusted, and abscission of the blood exsiccation of the humidities.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure those calluses wrapped in bandages or in cause of three into that place gets a bruise, and then cure the wound with hard meat generating and consolidating.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And those medicines in which there is stipticity and exsiccation; when then is restored, it is healed and does not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the fistula has already passed into the prostate and is elongated from there to the surface of the abdomen, then enter the finger into the anus and search for that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And thus, if the tent is placed between you and her, and it is made of silk or flesh, and it is prepared for penetration, at that time it is not an operation in her but a second way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer it in her in one of three ways: either to cauterize that which we have said; or to separate that which you can reach through the cavity of her so that you can enter and treat those things and the proposed cure, and not process any motion through which you do not incise the skin containing the intestine, and that something happens on the patient and immediately after the procedure; and then cure that which we have said that it is very useful for healing; or to lengthen that cloth and remove that which secures that entrance prop to the cul, as we have said, or with another instrument of sharp extremity, and then treat those fistulas which are in the section inside the intestine where you can perform cauterization; and then exert yourself to restore the entire plague of the section, and if the opening is not consolidated above, and remains open in the part of the cul, and is more painful for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, the fistula is closed according to this method: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is around the surface of the anus and on the edge of the anus, then take the perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the wound in this way.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And then insert the probe into that layer of fat or around those; and then insert the probe into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates the edge of the anus nearby, then you extract that fat layer that you introduced into the anus; and remove the end of that fat and adjust both ends, and scrape each one, and leave that for a day or two, and when more fat is inserted into the flesh, scrape those which are between the two ends of the fat and which can be removed.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then heal the wound where it has been consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifices of the fistula do not penetrate, then make them penetrate, in whatever way you prepare, but do not force it into the first one, as you are not doing that to cause damage; and then apply a cure for that which is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spiral spring that is used to pierce the fistula: the curvature of which is sharp and the other part is not sharp, so as not to damage what is not necessary, sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Stitching of edemas in which there is blood at the beginning of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Edemas can occur in two ways, either between the buttocks similar to that of coal, or those which are like grease on rags.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those, there are small and large ones, and that the blood comes from them immediately and is one, and its matter, and its outlet in the buttocks, and in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those which have the outlet in the buttocks according to the few moisture, of which there is a yellowish blood or a small amount of blood that continues, and its color is like that.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is inside the abdomen is that you command the patient to lie down and expel what is inside before the bowel moves and the feces appear in front of you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you stand over the patient and hold something like a scalpel in your hand, and then make an incision on their skin.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the incisions cannot be made on those parts due to their moisture and softness, then take something sharp like a knife or a needle or a piece of woolen cloth, and extract them with those, and then make an incision on them and sprinkle some powder suitable for cauterization at the incision, so that they can be used as a cauterizing agent; or cauterize them according to what is written in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the bowel does not open, then crestristize the patient with a crestrist in which there is a small bite, and wash it with that water which is inside the abdomen and which opens the bowel more easily when the patient expels.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the swollen parts deform the anus, the cause of this is usually falsehood, and you should grasp those with your finger, or with a probe, and incise those, and then care for them with the remedy that we have mentioned before they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And the one who first incises should administer a suture of their second in this manner: take a needle and introduce it into the wound, and then extract the swollen parts to the parts above, and make that penetrate with the needle into the structure of the other part, and wrap the two extruded ends of the needle in the part behind the needle, and longitudinally; and strongly strengthen the swelling against the structure, and then tie the needle and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and leave one of them untouched, so that the excess of the cure comes from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place a cloth soaked in rose-scented oil or in cero on the anus; and place that over the wound and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that one in the box; and when it is healed, treat those wounds with ointment or other treatment until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Causes of fistulas that occur due to excessive dryness or natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if you do not know how to treat them in that medicine, then make a point with a needle or your nail into those wounds that are moist and hold the pus above, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat those that have consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then hold those wounds with very violent pus that the first one has healed and is excoriated; and then treat those that have healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of gout, it is said.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that gout is said to be, and not if it is not red like the color of the body, and it is made throughout the body and mainly in the parts below the feet and the wrists, and causes pain in those joints.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then cover that which is inside the navel with a scissor, and hold it with forceps or a hook, and remove it from its location; and then care for that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the second one that precedes in its head.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Warts are small, hard, round fistulas on the surface of the body, and they cause pain in the joints of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And its treatment is that you extend and cut it, or that you remove it with forceps or a hook through a box.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now the ones that are inside and outside have been removed with the instrument that I will tell you.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	And ants are small, furry or large, round fistulas on the surface of the body, and when they bite at that place, it is centipedes in the same way as a mordification of ants, and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The care of the patient is to take a strong pen needle or voltor needle, and place it over the ant mound where the circle of the needle contains it; then rotate your hand with the needle inside the circle, and place it on the surface of the flesh, and remove the ant from its nest.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to do this with a needle made of iron in the following way:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part of the needle above the canula should be thin and sharp, unperforated, wrapped in something that the part of the patient's body where it is applied is not exposed to air, and rotate it.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the ant according to what is called in the cauterization of atherosclerosis in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are administered to give catharsis.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some clysters are made of silver or lead or melted metal; and some clysters are made of those instruments that are administered according to the size of the child, because the one that is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those who have foul or painful stools, the clysters of those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of a large and small cister:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the catheter of the patient above, in which the bag is attached, should be wide according to this method; and at the distance where the bag is attached, it should be like this.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the catheter, which is inserted into the anus, should be like a lion's tongue, thin; and on one side of it, two openings, and on the other side, one opening, and the width of the opening should be according to the size of the rays and slightly thicker.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines of the bladder of an animal or lamb's wool are placed, and the reason for it is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced by a thin needle like this, and if the space between the openings is the largest of them.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert a strong, thin thread through those openings, which should be made of fine silk, or around them; and adjust the bag; and when the bag is placed in it, it should be straight in the middle of the cister between two distinct, tight strings, and close the opening: However, the quality of closing the opening is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be scalded according to the tolerance of the patient; and be careful that it is not too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be placed on their back, and their legs raised to support them, with a pillow or a blanket underneath; and then apply a warm poultice made of oil, or albumen of egg, or fenugreek mucilage, or a similar substance, into the anus to facilitate evacuation, and the nurse should hold a basin underneath to catch everything that is expelled from the intestines.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine does not work as expected, keep applying it for as long as possible; and if the patient sleeps throughout the night, it is better to do so later in the evening.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you cleanse the patient in the baths of stomach solutions and apply the medicine, then repeat the cautery until they are healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are abscesses or pus in the anus, then use a soft and gentle bath, from the baths that children are usually bathed in.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	He has already said in the division of the treatment of wounds that this is suitable for free people, and he says so accordingly, with the treatment of those who are not free, and with medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that wounds are diverse according to what kind of wound they are and where they occur on the body.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which wounds are made are such as with a stone, or incision of a spear or dagger, or percussion by an arrow, or a gunshot, or a sword blow, or similar to those caused by stones.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the wounds that are in the parts of the body such as the head, neck, chest, abdomen, and thighs, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And he has counted the treatment of some wounds in order to pause that reasoning and rule over other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I begin with the simplest wounds of the head, for the memory of the compositions will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So it is said that when a simple wound occurs in the head and is not a fracture, if it is caused by a stone or something similar, and if the wound has only been cleaned with water and is large and there is a risk of abscess forming, then you should apply a cauterizing ointment to the cephalic area as soon as possible; and remove it after a short time if no cause prohibits the use of such an ointment, especially if the wound that exists from the injury is not deep.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if the cephalic cauterization is on the opposite side of the wound, then watch out for the patient's swelling, heat, and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is any cause that prohibits the use of a minor ingredient, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or fish.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place over the wound, if an abscess occurs, a poultice made of bread soaked in hot oil or in which a styptic is placed.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	However, if it is certain that the abscess has recently formed and the air has not changed in the powder that I will recommend to apply soon.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed there, then place damp bandages on it until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	However, if the wound is large or extends into spaces and similar places, and the lips of it are not adjusted by threads, then adjust them according to what I will recommend for the stitching of such wounds.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	However, if the wound has already exposed the bone and flesh, and it is not retained by a small suspension but by a thread, then insert it into that and care for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to eat foods in which there is grease: caps and similar things, until it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find decay in the tendon and it does not adhere to the bone, then scrape off all that putrid matter and wash it away, and then care for it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow, and it has not been cut off by medical means, then you should investigate the artery, and if you find that it is not cut, then scrape it with a spatula or tie it; and if you are forced to do so, then cauterize where the blood flows.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is light; however, you should powder them with this powder, which when applied will prevent the air from moving them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The way of the powder is as follows: take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished charcoal; mix all these together until it is a thick paste, and then fill the wound, and bind it tightly with a good bandage, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then tightly tie that above the pus and leave it there until it is not dislodged, because it is not cured of that until it is healed by the medicine.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes that alone is used cauterization, when not at your disposal and of silver.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical operation is performed on the large wounds when it is necessary to place it over those and to keep them straight, and their wounds recently cleaned, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the summer time, then this powder is not placed in that position, but first cure those with what we have said, whether you place over those acetic ointments, or you place over those feet of flour of barley and water and honey inside until they are healed; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if an accident occurs to the wound fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you remove that with the following.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I say the cure for head fractures in this case is to apply leeches.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the pustules on the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the pustule occurs on the neck, it is not different in medicine, and between the pustule of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves or artery of the neck have already been cut, if it is nerves, then not in the same engine but rather avoid that cure of it which causes great stenosis, as well as zinc and zig that is veratrum and similar to theirs which does not harm the nerves and contracts those.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place anything on the pustule at all as a cause of complete fever, because the substance of the nerves is fever and the continuation of it is to the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that which is cured of false medicines, as it is caused by washed with hot water, some vinegar in olive oil, roasted or not roasted, and then when washed with hot water and the others pearls minimizing according to this manner, and find honey.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, then administer stitches or tie the lips of the wound, and then care for it with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the wound is deep or accidents occur in the lower part of the wound, then pierce it in the most dependent part.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If an artery is already incised and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent such a thing.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the ribs of the chest have already been incised and the veins of the collarbone are saved, then adjust the flaps of the cavity over the ribs of the chest and do not touch that; in front, equal it to its natural shape, and strengthen it with a structure of decency, and leave it for several days; and care for it with ointments in which there is astringency and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has already penetrated the bone, then puncture it; and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can from them; and what cannot be removed, leave it until the wound heals, and it is separated and the edges of the wound are healed.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the wound is recent, then powder it with the powder that was recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If the wound has formed a fistula, then treat it with the ointment that will arrive soon at its head.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds of the neck or similar ones that are made between the shoulder blades, use a sponge or a catheter or a lance or a similar instrument.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If the percussion of the lance or catheter is deep, then consider whether the wound has been bleeding when the patient breathes; you will know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth and the wound is recent, then you should place powder on it during the first hour to prevent the wound from being held in its depth and returning to the heart, but rather place something attractive on it, and let those days pass.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the wound is not at your present, then you should place something on the edge of the wound to allow the liquid that is in the humidity to drain; and make sure the patient sleeps on the wound so that the liquid that is in it can run out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the pain has lasted for three days or more and has not affected the patient with spasm, trembling of the heart, or stricture of the abdomen, and other conditions are good, then know that the pain is saved; and then cure that one with hot baths and the other with other treatments until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of that one has been excused and has always been opened, then know that it is time to make an incision; therefore, cure that one through its own opening.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the pain is due to an incision of the spleen or of the cut, and it is simple on the surface of the abdomen or back, then cure that one with what is preceded by sutures, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has already been done on the bones, and that one has been incised before, then twist the pain and take to extract those bones, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then leave them in place until the pain subsides, as extraction is discouraged.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other parts of the body, the treatment of these accidents in healing is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the abdominal pains.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition that occurs in the abdomen is either large, or small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Some of the large intestines or nerves of the intestine, because it is necessary to insert them and stitch them more forcefully and more subtly.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small rupture is difficult to treat by another method, and if the reduction of them is more difficult, then you must not delay in inserting them to their proper place as soon as possible, because it becomes open and swells, making treatment difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best rupture is moderate, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is difficult in the two special cases mentioned.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two stitches are common that are usually used in stitches of other parts of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures properly communicate to the other wounds, but rather more proper in the abdominal suture.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend that you explain and declare each one to you.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore say that when the wound is small and there is no cause of the intestine for that, and it is difficult to reduce that, then in one of two ways: either by puncture of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine becomes inflamed due to the cold of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when that is the case, then cover that with a cloth that you soak in warm water alone, or that you boil in water with cyperus, spice, and embrocation, and apply it to the intestine before the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it is done in the one that has strengthening, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you see that the inflammation is resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which is covered high and sweet, because for that it is beneficial to the intestinal instrument of it with few cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If the instrument is approached too close to this treatment, then gently separate the disruption with a small, sharp instrument that is not serrated.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first treatment is best when it is not dry and does not involve unnecessary or insufficient drying.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	The shape of the instrument is as follows:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One side of the instrument is sharp and pointed, while the other side is not sharp. The tip is thin but not as thin as a needle, with a slightly blunt edge.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	When the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, then ensure that its reduction is done according to its natural shape, in its proper place, if possible over it, which is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is large and in the lower part of the abdomen, then ensure that you have the patient lie on their back, placing their legs as high as possible, and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place your hand on the instrument and raise their chest.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then your understanding and consideration should be prompt to ensure that the affected part is not more than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And you should administer this in large wounds and minor wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, place the preparation you have made between your cleanest fingers, holding the disruption completely in your hand and adjusting the lips of the wound, and from one stitch to another, if any cause arises, apply another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common method of suture: you take an awl, or a second awl according to the quantity of the wound's width; and lay it at the end of the disruption of the said ring, and strengthen the awl one, or not put it in the two ends of the thread that is left over from the two parts that are left after the thread is cut; and you have added two ends of the thread and two ends of the needle, and make four knots.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Approach with strong force in the circle of the needle, and some stitches of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by addition of decency; and approach the thickest part of it and insert another needle into that, and approach that with force as you would with the first needle; and do not cease to do this until the wound is completely closed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of medium thickness between coarseness and subtlety, because thin needles more easily penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the codena, and therefore it is recommended that they be of medium thickness in subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And do not let the needle be stuck in two ends of the codena improperly, so that the flesh is not penetrated too easily and that the wound heals before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they should not be prolonged in stitches so that the wound is not prevented from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then insert the ends of the needles so that they do not dislodge the patient from their position; and place powder-filled pads on all parts, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them in until you know that the wound is consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of needle stitches in skilled hands are suitable for small wounds, where in their stitching there is one needle or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second stitch is similar: and you administer the stitch to the four ends of the tendon and two ends of the ligament in a row, with a needle that is thinly wrapped in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that part of the thread where it began, so that the true track of the thread's upper part to the wound, so that the stitch is the second stitch of cloth where the cloths are strong.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Pause between each stitch the amount of the thick part of the said wound.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch is for women.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And this stitch was used to close the wound that had occurred in a man's belly, which was punctured with a knife, and it was a tear of the main wound of a palm, and it was located around two palms of the intestine in the middle part of the member; and then she reduced it because the intestine had been open for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was healed in the space of fifteen days or so, and then it was closed and healed; and afterwards, she used that ointment for a while, and she continued with her usual activities.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had thought that it would not heal; and by a miracle of fire, which she did not close with that ointment, which was in the place where there was no medicine, but she kept it over the wound for two days and then washed it frequently with honey water until the fire healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two special types of suture according to the narrative of Paracelsus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And if you begin with the suture of the cod, and insert the needle from the forepart to the rear part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so that the needle penetrates through the cod and the other metes straight and long throughout the whole body, and leave the extremity of the cord in which you inserted the needle; and let the other end of the needle penetrate from the forepart to the rear part in the other extremity of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And so that you have made the first penetration, then make another penetration in the other extremity of the wound from the forepart to the rear part; and leave the extremity of the cord on this side, and let the needle penetrate in the other extremity of the wound from the forepart to the rear part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And let the needle penetrate through the cord at the point where it enters the wound, so that all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin at this point and cut that which is on the outer side of the elbow in the other arm, and remove the needle that has penetrated, and return it to that suture and cover the end of the elbow that is on the other side with this extracted part; and remove the other from the suture.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this several times, and do this several times, approaching another suture before you close all of that which is deformed according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The advantage of this method of suturing is that you close the suture with skin flaps that cover the hairs, so that you suture the elbow one time from the part of the end of the needle, and let the other suture heal before it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second special type of suture called Guillotine, and this is how it should be done for each part and for each person, is that you suture that second semilunar part which doctors usually suture to that part, so that all parts are joined together naturally; and apply the end of another part to the other end of that, and the end of the mirror to the other end of it, and this is done according to your recommendation.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you have the needle at the end of the mirror, in your own hand, and make it penetrate the part of the body from the outside to the inside, and leave two ends of the thread; then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside again.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then rotate those needles, and make each one penetrate from the inside to the outside of the body through two other ends of the mirror that are on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suture is better than the common ligature, and is the suture that was previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the word of Galen
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And moreover, it is said that the stitch of the belly is straightened with two needles, so that you insert each one in these with a true thread, and begin with the insertion of the needle of which you think is right, and make it penetrate through the other side according to the stitches of those that equally cover the hearts.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When the disruption occurs in the middle of the abdomen, the suture of that area is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of the medical treatment of plague is a judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you obtain the plague recently from the same source that air alters it, and reduce the intestine and its contents and prepare it improperly, then place powder on it.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then place on it an ointment made of ingredients that you have present and can make into a hard paste, and let it consolidate and dry; and cure it as is the cure for other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have the medicines present, then place on it a paste made of ingredients that are easily available, and change it twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you should not need other medicine in such simple cases when the plague is present.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague might spread to the main members, then cover the wound with a piece of cloth dipped in high-quality oil or oiled oil, and place it around the area where the bones are located.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in your intestines, which could lead to death, then apply a black stipitic wound dressing, and especially if the poisoning has spread to the intestine and penetrated deeply into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You should know that the pus from large intestines is less harmful than the pus in small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to heal the intestine called "gegunu" from all plague that may be in it; this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, its great size, its subtlety, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If that which proceeds from the plague is a thread, and you manage to remove it, then reduce it according to your correctness, reducing the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If the space has already been opened and it is now white or black, then apply a firm pressure on the area that is discolored from blood, in order for bleeding to stop, as there are veins and arteries in the tissue.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then insert that other piece of gauze, and place two ends of the gauze hanging from the edge of the wound under it, so that the attraction of the wound is from the cavity of the tissue and the emission of the blood from the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the wounds that have occurred in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because they have seen the one who was wounded in their belly by percussion of a lance and the wound was on the left side of the stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula, and they managed to restore its function and mobility.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then you continued the treatment of it as if it was not connected to its healing, but you subtly treated that which was healed and the location was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And if you have not yet seen the location that has already solidified, apply pressure on the patient's abdomen to prevent the accident from causing further harm; and do not attempt any action for that accident and remain in place, eating and drinking, and then return to bed and practice it there.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And experienced people say that when there is a wound in the intestine, and it is small, then you should apply a large bandage; and place both sides of the wound and place one of those bandages with the mouth open over both sides of the wound; so when you put on those and strengthen the mouth, cut the cap of the wound, which adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another bandage on the first one, and do not stop doing this to make bandages one after another according to the size of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and the wound; and keep those bandages attached to the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine is torn by a sharp object that is attached to it, such as a needle; and you should grasp the end of these sharp objects of the intestine, which should be dissected, and then wrap the end of the intestine with the sharp object, and introduce that sharp object into the wound, and reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suture is only a second option of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then it is not possible to sew it up, but only to remove it, and not to heal it at all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the treatment of fistulas and abscesses.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You should know that every wound and abscess that becomes inflamed and suppurates, and is made into an ulcer, and does not consolidate and continues to drain continuously and is not excised, in any member, universally it is called a fistula, and we call it a sinus.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And in truth, fistula is a narrow, white, painless cavity that has the same consistency as a vein; and it is called by the name of vein, that is, sinus.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in wet people, it is found in the armpit, which is called the axilla; and if the moisture is not removed within a few hours, it will cause pain.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is moved, and it is thin, thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division, as I said about wounds, that every ulcer that is not healed or is not in the raw flesh is not this but one of these causes: one of which is because of inflammation in the tissue; or because of maliciousness of the ulcer; or because between it and the lips there is hard flesh that prevents natural growth of flesh; or because of moisture in the region; or because that ulcer in itself is poorly formed, and the matter that is at it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is unsuitable for its cure; or when corruption catches in the region, and it is pestilence; or because of the nature of the region, as is common in Saragossa, where digestion of evils is difficult, and healing of apostema by nature is delayed; or because there are bones, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	After showing all those causes, their symptoms, and the cures for them in the medical division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And now I will tell you how to cure a fistula, which is caused by surgery.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; among those, there are fistulas that reach great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spleen, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the joints composed by such a composition as of the hand and foot; and from these, it is close to the principal member and similar ones.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, among these fistulas, the one that follows this method is one of the difficult diseases to cure, and does not receive treatment, and occupation is hard work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any fistula has a depth that does not reach these places, and you hope and believe in its cure, and you want to reach knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight, and you find it with you.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then gently probe it with a thin bougie, as the weight of the patient's body relieves and straightens the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is very painful, it is not possible to insert the bougie into it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then apply the cautery to its orifices, as the moisture you apply to one also affects the others and spreads from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then carefully explore, according to the method you know how to recognize if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the fistula is long or short, or whether it is a fistula with many openings that covers everything from the entire length of your strength, your perseverance, your investigation, which investigates the patient, and similar to the meanings and causes of accidents in the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have understood all these causes, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, long from the joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places which I have mentioned to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry the fistula after it is said to be ready for the extraction of its contents, and remove any material that is in that filter and rotten flesh, and any material that is born in the orifices of the flesh, or in the intestines and similar, and cure that within which it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	However, if the fistula is of great depth and is straight, then cut it as much as possible from its front, and remove all rotten flesh from it; and administer cotton soaked in acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that with it for some time until the acute medicine corrodes all that is in the cavity of the fistula of the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	However, if it is not healed by that, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be confirmed by you, then inquire about that and dry it according to what we have recommended, unless you prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member present as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is yours to discover and it is in any corruption or darkness, then remove that within which the corruption is held completely; and cure that with what enters that which is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and there is no such way as it was, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover again and more carefully make the reason of it and the purification of it with the last fortification tied, and then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, good; and if not, then know that that corruption is in the long distance depth of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore in that you are not able to do anything but leave that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the broken bone is small, or it is possible to pull it out, then use delicate forceps that are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if you have the strength to extract all of them, then do so carefully without any cause that would harm your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if there is any opposition to the cause of moisture, and at first there is no fear or mistake, then insert those ligaments or flesh that are there, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you do not have the preparation of bones from your hour, then place something that will harden the wound over those bones, and let it remain there until the wound is surrounded by flesh and ligaments, and keep the wound from being consolidated and strengthen the section that you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having said that, if you fear, place something over the wound submerged in three times olive oil, or submerged in Egyptian wine, or in any of the oils, because when those ligaments heal, and the bones are separated from their place, the inflammation will be alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If there is a large bone such as the thigh bone or hip bone or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the skin of it, then rub that area with resin only until it is stopped from spreading that blackness and corruption, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the area where the corruption reaches, and then cure it before it becomes consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend that you have someone who has experience and assistance on your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around the age of 30, who has pain in his hip, and from the parts that are swollen on the matter of the body until the matter reaches the hip, and that matter is great abscess, and not an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then he extended the time with that until the abscess was formed, and other matters followed, and his cure was delayed until the thigh became fistulated, and the points in the wounds were all poured out and the moisture of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the care of doctors was often around two years, and not in those days but in the art, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the bed of the patient and the matters that flowed from him those orifices, which were all yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the tent into one of those orifices and reached the tent to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I quickly examined all the orifices and found that they were all open from all parts of the bed.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I was able to see and insert into one of the orifices those that described a piece of bone, and at the same time I found that it was already rotten and corrupted and degenerated; and a part of the bed had already been penetrated by the meat.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I was able to prepare that which was discovered from the bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I knew that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had removed and prepared, and it had already been discarded.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then pause to restore the relief of pain with solidifying medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then wait and observe the second bone over the first observation, and again continue corruption in the bones.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And repair what I see of that corruption, and then wait to be pierced to make its cure and restoration, and it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then observe the other side and do not cease to incise the small parts of the bone gradually and pierce the restoration of it, and it is not restored until you have incised almost a palm of it, and that extracted from its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is consolidated more firmly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation of amputation and sectioning of it, but for the disposition of the wound of it and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of death, because it happens in all hours due to excessive evacuation of bad sincopi.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus, the healing is for complete recovery, and nothing is in place of hard meat; it is well to arrange him in his own body and return his strength to him; and he is converted in his arrangements and does not do harm to him in ambulation or in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If there is a fracture in the body, then follow this method: and it is that you take the bandage and strength of that part at the end of that fractured bone, and command those who extend it; and place that thicker wool from the first bandage over the flesh that is left after the bone, and extend the outside of it to draw the flesh to the parts that are left, and you uncover the flesh over the place that you want to sew in order that the stitch does not hurt the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a tablecloth under the bone correctly, because when you do that, it is not forbidden to sew without the stitch rotting the flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And sew over the rotten part gradually, because if it is in the hollow of the bone corruption and does not appear on its surface to the touch, and force the stitch of it another way.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bones are rotten and not eminent, and they continue in one piece to another, and the corruption is at the middle or in a piece of it, then you should remove the flesh from all parts; and place a bandage underneath, and suture the first piece where the corruption enters before continuing the suturation of the other piece.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if the suturing is at the location of the corruption, then do it as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and suture the bone where it continues from the other piece.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then do not suture in the ratio but rather in a pattern.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is quite difficult; however, you should inquire about the corruption and how it appears to you, and remove that, and clean it according to each possible disposition, and when no contrary venous or nerve comes out, then rectify it to you.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know what are the saws and the serrations to cut these bones according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and scarcity of those, and their hardness and rarity; so that you may prepare all kinds of operation with a suitable tool for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that for that operation, you need the specific tool that you lack; when you are greatly studied and long and knowledgeable of the ways of this art, and testimony of the ways of diseases, then you will have already learned what is suitable for you in the tools for each disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you should know the number of tools that you will use at the end of this chapter, and how to process them with simple ones, which you will experience on the others.
Forma de serra:	Saw shape:
Forma de autra serra:	Another saw shape:
Forma de autra serra:	Another saw shape:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Another large saw shape:
Forma de ray:	Form of the ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The shape of this ray is like the head of a star, and its points are shaped like those of an asterisk.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It is not advisable to use this ray only on the joints when they are corrupted or if the mouth is very wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of the major razor:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of the minor razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of the lateral razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another well-made saw: make the shape of its back curved and the sharpness of its teeth, and the handle of it should be made of wood.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor with concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another delicate razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another curved-ended razor:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an instrument that cuts bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another minor cutter:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this similar to a ray, and the end of it is like a screw, and it is displayed in various places in the ratio of bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of ray which is suitable for the ratio of that which is pierced through the bones.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and has a sharp tip.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly coated with all the causes that we have said about razors, incisors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the cutting ends and the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The ends can be sharp or due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or when you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the cure does not succeed, sometimes the corruption causes the member which is not cut by any cause, then cover that member within that wound, so that the patient escapes from that death or harm which is greater damage to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	When the limb of the one who has suffered, is made black within that it is possible that the fire has burnt the joint, or if the wound is approaching the blackness before the wound enters into that limb which is located there and which takes all the body; and then cover it with a bandage.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if it is caused by the corruption of some poisonous causes such as scorpion venom or of viper or of ruetal and of similar ones.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the poisoning is at the end of the said limb, then you insert it and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	Similarly, if it enters into the body, then you insert that of the tip of the phosphorus, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes in the phosphorus of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if that does not work, then insert the arm into the cavity at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If the corruption spreads and the weather changes around the wound, then that is often the death of the patient; and to administer another remedy in treatment depends on the quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	Similarly, when corruption spreads around the foot, then you insert that into one of the nails.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If it takes hold in the arch of the foot, then you insert the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it can enter the ankle, then you insert the cushion into the joint of the ankle.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already reached the ankle, then there is no remedy, and you leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of inserting the member or cutting it is that you strengthen the skin at the part where you want to insert, and strengthen another skin over the area; and extend the minister a skin to the parts behind, and extend another minister skin on top; and you separate the flesh that is between two skins about an inch wide until the entire flesh is revealed; and then insert or cut.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover the area with a cloth from all parts so that it does not touch the wound, and bring the injury and pus to the patient adjusted and cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if blood flows when you work, then cauterize the wound constantly, or place some astringent powders on it; and then return to your treatment before it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the bandage to the injured member at the appropriate place, and cure that before it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And you should also recommend to your patient that which happens to a man in his foot, this accident that you and I have recommended, which happens to him because of the black bile that was similar to a burn caused by fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurs in his big toe within which all the foot is affected.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared for himself more pus than the cure going to the member because of its intensity of pain and burning of it, and the incision in that foot at the joint, and it healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, it has been common for that corrupt practice in the mentioned place.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it happened to me, and I was perforated by that excessive humidity that had been placed on the mouth of the medicines, approaching the cleaning of the body of the patient; and if the excessive humidity is not expelled, it begins to go to the other part where it began in the mouth.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to incise the mouth of the patient, and I did not want to do so hoping for the expulsion of that excessive humidity, and more than fearing the beginning of the mouth of the patient dead, because the virtue of the patient was in danger.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he was disappointed with me, he returned to his land and reached me that that man had prepared and incised his whole mouth, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narrative except to be helpful in what is being said about this illness, and that it has meaning by which it is understood and according to which it is done.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the care of sinuses and quality of the clyster with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in a fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and it is broken and perforated, and the pus is poured out from it, and the place remains open like a vessel, and the codex that is above it is covered with fine cloth, and it does not reach corruption, and it does not press on bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged until corruption presses on a member, then it is called a fistula and does not heal.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is to insert that codex entirely with what is rolled up, and more so when it is covered with fine cloth, and you make sure that it does not stick to the place because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you hope that the codex will stick and that the corruption has not been completed because of posterior consequence, and in the codex there is a break, then you cure it with a clyster.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And if you consider the sinew, and if it is large, and the brace that you have made of fragrant oil, then cleanse it with the Egyptian medicament which is made of oil and vinegar and zinc, receive equal parts in a container, and coat it with honey until the medicament becomes thick.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse the sinew with that, strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine in place for the duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that which is necessary; and do this for so many days until the sinew is cleansed and the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes the wound is cleansed with ash water, when you are not using this medicament; and then take the ashes of wheat, put them on the water; and after that, cleanse it with that until you confirm that the sinew is healed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then prepare a clyster with honey and vinegar mixed in equal parts, and prepare another clyster with honey and wine mixed together, because honey softens and cleans, and the wine makes it adhere to the sinew, especially when there is an excess of stiffness and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have done this for some time and you feel that the sinew has been renewed, then prepare a clyster with the water that causes the flesh to soften in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And if you take some fat diuretic and dissolve that thick oil and wine, which is stiffening; or if you prepare a clyster with some medicines and other oils that have the properties mentioned in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the sinew are narrow and cannot receive the nozzle of the clyster, then gradually widen them with that small iron, and wrap them in Egyptian ointment or basilicon until they are widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	If the anus is also open, then you should add stitches to it and leave enough quantity in which the intestines can be added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the anus of which the intestine passes through is raised to the parts above, then dry that place in the lower part where the intestine passes through, because when the intestine is constricted in the belly, the flesh in that place will be damaged.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus inside the lower part of the intestine as you wish, then prepare the member for the operation in which the intestine passes through, according to what is appropriate and that there is no cause of the intestine being retained.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that are placed on the sinus appropriately for that which you want to extend over that cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a large quantity that it covers all the sinus; and then insert the forceps into the right side of the anus, a larger tube than the anus; and then extend over another cloth from the mouth of the lesions according to the quantity of the tube, and place it over that for a long position of the anus so that the stool of the patient is not obstructed but rather brought close to the cloth.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	When it is on the opening of the sinus, which remains open all the time to prevent that which is inside from coming out.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know whether that which comes from the arm is a lot or little, whether it is digested or not.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And if you have considered the location of that sinus, whether there is pain in it or not, and if it is in the abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And if your treatment is prolonged in this way, and you see that the matter that is excreted over the opening of the sinus has adhered, or that it has not adhered, then you should remove it or wait until the third day, and when you remove the plaque, then change the dressing and renew the poultice.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And if from the sinus a subtle virus approaches, do not despair of its adherence, for the healing of it will take place, for some men in which the generation of flesh in those plaques takes a long time, and of those who are in which the opposite of it is done.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the abdomen a lot of gas is ingested, you should know that the abdomen does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the abdomen is delayed and this prolongs the cause, then adjust in the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their effect, they are dried as with a diaphragm when added with excessive zeal.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most effective one that is cured, is to take a diaphragm and dissolve it in rose oil, and place it on the wound like an antic in its substance, and comfort that bandage with that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it is done in a similar way in that action, when there is no gas, diaphragm when it is coagulated, and use of that; or take mirra and aloe and ense, and grind all and powder over the wound when it is above the fire, and line that with that cloth and strengthen that on the abdomen; and line that bandage which you have taken when it is coagulated, and powder over cloth and strengthen that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Some of these remedies are administered according to astrology's long and complex rules (and it is the celestial lily) and flour, centaury, and use of those simples or adjustments, trim those and crumble and powder over the melted fat that he has recommended; and use of this.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the sinew is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the bone of him, and it has already been investigated in the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then treat it with the fistular cure as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the treatment of nail and toe crushed and added cutting of the finger and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Nail and toe abscess which is not behind the nail of the finger or foot, and very often it is in the other mentioned, and if it is prolonged and its treatment is highly valued, or it is a caustic abscess, or it is corrupted, and very often it eats the tip of the nail, and very often it corrupts all of it, and very often its corruption goes into the bone until it smells fetid, and the end of the said limb is black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	When you have that same tool we mentioned in the division and do not compromise your cure, then cut off all excess tissue that remains from the nail and then cauterize the area with that tool, as a pointed cautery is beneficial in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is healed and the nail is healthy, and the attachments of the nail have already joined the flesh to the parts divided, and the pungent and lead have begun to work there, then cover that angle of the nail that punctures the flesh, and push it towards that area, and cut away that flesh with ease, and place over it a poultice from the herbs that were used to burn corrosively until it is all removed; and cure that wound with ointment before it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already entered the bone, then cut away that part of the bone and remove it, for there is no time when that bone can be healed if it is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you see the corrosion and corruption occurring in the same place, then insert that needle into one of the nails according to its memory, and cure it while it is still healthy.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the nail is broken or pierced, and the pain is very intense, then first cleanse the patient, and dry the nail with a sharp transverse cut above it, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh that is behind the nail, because you will cause great pain to the patient and potentially harm the surrounding tissue; and cure that place with something that reduces pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, this is not common in the bones of all men, but it is fleshy throughout, and it is often in the bones, or it is in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And this is not common in the joints, or it is the origin of that in other bones.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	However, this is not bad if it occurs in other bones of the same type, and this is often bad if it occurs in joints.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are not fleshy, the section is lighter, and you should insert that devise into their rib cage at an appropriate distance.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	The treatment of that which is not in the rib cage of the joint is difficult; therefore, beware of its abscess.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The treatment of that which is not in the place of the nuts, cover that you insert at the beginning of the flesh of it into the bone roundly through the bone, and then use one of those convenient screws for that, and cure it within the time it becomes healthy.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	The consolidation that occurs among the mentioned bones or by birth of the man who was not born with them, or by consolidation of plague or by burning of fire, or by similar things, therefore cover that you separate that consolidation within the time it returns to its natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their clothes some oil that is thinly poured out so that it is not consolidated too lightly, and separate between those, or place between those a thin layer of plaster until it is consolidated according to what you cover.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if a consolidation occurs in the palm of the hand, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the figure of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	At the beginning of the vice, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varicose, and their veins are thick and full of melancholic superfluities that come from the limbs of the body, and the greatest event of them is in the loins, and especially in the loins of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then cover that you administer purgation of the body of black cholera some strong expulsions, and then draw blood from the patient from the basilica vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure of their wounds is done in two ways: one is that it is incised and that it is thrown away that black pus, and the other way is that the vein is raised and all the blood is extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The drying of the wound is done in this way: first, heat the lower back with a hot tail for a while until the black pus is resolved, which is feculent from the lower back, and then strengthen the patient's back to the most suitable part of the cushion near the denol at one end, and then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three in a wide incision, and then raise the black pus to the middle of the patient's back above the wound and below the skin, until the amount that you want and that is necessary is removed, and the patient bears it.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And approach that one, and command her to refrain from foods that generate black bile causing anger.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that does not harm the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of their legs should be done in this manner: you who raise the patient's leg, if it is swollen with fluids, and place it in hot water and rub the leg of the patient with a warm cloth until it becomes red and the veins are exuded; or it should be exercised by exercise strong, if bathing is not at your present, until that member is softened.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And apply the bandage in the right direction of the vein for drying out in the long or at the back of the patient's foot, or at the lowest part of the foot you should use the tape.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And apply the bandage with a needle and excoriate the vein from all parts until it appears at the sensation, and it should be applied to the patient that sometimes that one declines to black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so, as you have removed and taken away that white cord from there before.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then place your hand under that raised and rotated cord, and support it with an onion.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then cut another section near that section for three times, and then scrape the cord from the part above the vein where it appeared.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then raise that and insert it into the back section of the bone, and then extract it and raise it where it is on the second section, and then extract it from the section above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do that where it is extracted from the section that is most sunken or farthest from all the sections, where everything is on the inside; and then insert it there.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to extract and raise it, then insert a strong, double-edged needle and tie it there, or insert it behind the cord and rotate your hand over all the parts where it is rotated.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to lacerate it; for if it is broken, it is difficult to lift that part and it comes down on the patient causing harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the entire area has been exposed, pause over the location of the wool that is submerged in wine and oil, both rosy and not, and cure that which is unhealthy.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is twisted and has a tortuous shape that does not follow the straight line as we have said, then cover it with a cloth and cut it at all points of its tortuosity and at the locations of its wrapping, and suspend it on an unsung instrument until you lift it all.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to lacerate the vein and not to damage that area, for it is difficult to lift that part; and use your prudence in that matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision made on the vein that was cut:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of a hook:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be at the exact location where the incisions are made or of sharp extremity to avoid damaging the vein; and it should be thick and flexible like a lion, because if it is too thin, it will lacerate the vein due to its thinness; having enough thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the hollows in low lands, such as At-Athegi in Arabic lands and in the dry and arid lowlands of India where there is little greenery.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is often generated in other parts of the body besides the hollows.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the condition of it is putrefaction that leaves the wound as if with poison from snakes, worms, and other creatures generating between the wound and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the susceptibility to the occurrence of it is from this vein that happens in the hollow, violent inflammation; and then the place is blistered; and then the vein is removed from that blister which seems to resemble a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then with the appearance of it, you should cover it with a poultice of lead from which is the weight of a dragon, between two drachmas, and tie that and leave the lead suspended from the hollow.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so many wounds from that cause to those parts, wrap it in a poultice and apply it to that place.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is extended, then you should insert a piece of it and wrap it around; do not insert that part inside until it is outside and healed, because if you insert that part, it will cause inflammation and pus to form in the area and an ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it can be treated appropriately and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the back of it and there is no longer any cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it is found in many people who have it in their length of 2 palms and 10 digits, and I have found that it is one of 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is inserted during its treatment, then insert the needle into the vein of it and pierce that through the long vein to the body, until all the matter inside is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the area with medicines; and cure that for the treatment of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein has some wounds that cause pain, especially when they appear at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and come to it as offensive, and is removed from each offensive one.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Therefore, treat that as we have said in the division and apply that which is above mentioned.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section of worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is not called in any land by the bovine sickness because of the many wounds that go to the bones and it is a few worms, one of which is not between the flesh and the meat, and goes through the entire body and falls down, and is shown at the feeling of its own skin in member in member before it disrupts the flesh and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of it is by putrefaction of some humors with such as happen worms and serpents and earthworms and ascaris in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for the malice of it, because when it goes into the body and is raised to the head, and reaches the brain, then very much disease enters in it and destroys the brain, and that is many wounds.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore, when you want to cure that and extract it, it is not done without first examining its appearance and position relative to the sensation, and then strengthen what is above it and what is below it with a bandage and strong constriction, and then dry it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and not removed, then you place a heated cautery over the area where it is located, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of it which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see that it has reached the top of the bone, then strengthen over the upper jaw with a strong constriction, and then dry it and extract that; and advise the patient to use medical treatments that evacuate bad humors, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of section for pain in the navicular bone.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is not called in our land navicular, and it is pain that occurs in various members, and it is transmitted from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen the second thing that I will tell you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after an hour, I saw that inflammation go away like worms would do, more slowly than it should be, as if it were live silver when it moves from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain went away from that place and remained in the muscle, and after an hour, it was still there.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it moved correctly to the other side of the body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then it moved correctly to my astonishment, as I saw it move through the whole body and the change of it and the speed of one part to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen something like that in the muscles of the back, but I had never seen anything that would cause pain to be moved from one part to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	May you not see that which is in the abdomen as in a woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And you do not think that is because of that which the woman was of old, having a dry body, with veins and veins exposed, and in this appearance there is that sensation of heat changed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this appearance does not occur in those who are delicate and have a soft body of constricted veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And as you wish to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, do not look at the abdomen as we have said, but strengthen on that and leave it open and dry on that area where it should be covered with that heat, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	May it not be seen if you do not see the intestines in the abdomen, then you cure that which is caused by the expulsion of heat from the body and that which you expel, and those remedies that are bad pills and carminatives and similar.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From extraction of herbs.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sagetas are diverse according to their species, and according to the locations of the body where they occur, as their diversity is due to those that have large points, small ones, concave ones, and deaf ones, which are solid; and from those that have three angles, and from those that have tongues; and from those that have stings.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the one that is second to the members and the feet in which they occur is of two kinds: first, the main members cause it, such as the brain, heart, lung, liver, kidneys, bladder, and similar organs; and when pain occurs in any of these members and appears to you as signs of death, the cause of which you should be aware of, in those cases where death is likely in the member in which the pain is located, and when you do not appear with these symptoms, and the splinter is not embedded deep in the member, then you extract it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When the spinal cord is injured and passes through the bones, and is above the skull, which is above the brain, it causes severe symptoms such as scotoma, vertigo, tremors in the neck, inflammation of the tongue, spasms, and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of anger, and great pain is abscinded from the word and destroyed from the voice, and it is above the place of the wet white plague resembling pollen, and it comes out like the consistency of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Therefore, if you appear to have this spinal cord injury, then avoid the treatment and extraction of the spine, unless necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the spinal cord is injured and passes through the heart, which is close to the right breast, and it feels like a hard cause, and not a desirable cause; and great movement of the spine is similar to the movement of the neck, and comes from the black plague, and that freezing of the extremities, and fever, and tremors; and therefore you know that death descends upon all.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the blisters of the skin have placed the lungs almost entirely under the foam of the plague, and the veins that are close to the neck are inflamed, and the patient's color changes, and they expire with great difficulty, and demand a lot of air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the plague is in the cloth that is on the chest, and the pain is near the small ribs, and it is caused by a great sudden pain and breath, and does not affect all the members of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the plague is in the stomach, then there are many yellowish blisters of the plague seen to be eating some undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the plague is in the belly, and it is stuck in it, some rags of the plague, or cloth, or intestine that is torn, and there is no hope for its cure by removing the plague.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the plague is in the bladder, and it is found to be disfigured urine, and it causes some cause to the parts that are disfigured, and there is great pain on the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	When the other members are like the face, neck, shoulder, back, spine, ribs, sternum, and their similar parts of the body, they are saved according to the major dispositions when the wound does not involve a vein or artery and is not venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	I would recommend that to you who have seen these wounds, so that you know how to treat them in the care of the patient.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is that in a man such a wound occurs at the lacrimal duct of his eye in the corner of his nose, and you extract it from the other side, after the gray matter of his eyeball, and it is healed, and does not cause damage to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And you extract another wound from a Jew who has such a wound in his eye in the gray matter of his eyeball, after his eyelid, and the wound was already hidden and not achieved from that but a small extension to which adheres to his bone, and it was a great wound among the sharp wounds of the Turks, with no eyeballs.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	When it is the month of June, and there is no harmful event in its own season.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And another sage was extracted from a man named Crestian, who was captured in the dungeon, and was Arabic, and that was the one that healed him; and then he inserted it between two ointments, and it was already submerged in the dungeon of his; and then he subtly treated him with that, and then extracted it, and healed Crestian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And another sage was extracted from a man who was captured in his own belly, and he thought that he would die because of it; and then, after passing thirty days and not being moved for any reason related to his condition, he inserted it on the sage and applied it to him, and he was healed, and no harmful event occurred to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And he saw another man in whom a sage was inserted in the back of his, and it had consolidated the plague over him, and after about seven years, the sage had rotted in the center of the wound.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And a woman was seen who had a tumor in her abdomen, and the plague was consolidated within it, and it did not move in her positions, and the woman did not suffer any harm in some of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And another man was seen who had a tumor on his face, and the plague was consolidated within it, and the tumor moved, causing similar symptoms.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And the tumor was extracted from the man of the king's principal, which was located in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the direct part, and all the tumor was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And he was called for treatment of it within three days from the location of the tumor.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then he again felt pain from the tumor very sharply; and then he inquired of that one who was subtle, and did not feel that one; but he felt the point at the direct part of the nose, and then suspected that that point was at the end of the tumor.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply pressure on the area using a compress that has both attractive and digestive properties, so that the area can be prepared for me to examine the location of the wound, and dry it over there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not remove the compress from the area if there is a significant accident that has occurred; and continue to apply the compress on it for several days, without any accidents; and while the wound is healing, continue to examine the patient's condition every few days until the next day when the doctor examines the wound again.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then apply acute and corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it is ready to be burned, and carefully insert the tent into that, and again gently rub the tip of the doctor's finger against the skin.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then adjust the opening of the wound for that acute medicine until it becomes visible to me, and continue to examine it every few days for the next four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And after the wound has healed, and it is possible for me to examine it, I will continue to gently manipulate and engineer over it with various tools until one day I can use forceps to carefully remove it, according to the shape of those in the final chapter, until it is extracted; and then restore the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and if it is restored, the pain is consolidated, and the patient is healed completely, and there is no need for any reason.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some herbs in order to understand that rule and meaning about what I have not said, because the parts of this art and their definitions are not understood by narrative or they do not understand those who are free.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the craftsmen know how to compare with few words; and they know what is present about what is absent; and atroba operation novela and novel instrument you must descend from the external causes of the art when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that herbs are not removed from the members in which they are fixed but by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which it is inserted; or by the opposite of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is removed by the place in which it is inserted, or the herb comes from a fleshy place, and it is attracted and removed.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the instructions of the time at which the catheter is used, then cover it with a cloth for several days until the surrounding flesh becomes accustomed to it and the attraction of the catheter and its exit are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is inserted into the bone and you do not obey its instructions, then leave it there for several days and apply it again with attraction and moisture in each day, and it will eventually be healed.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey its instructions for several days, then cover it with a cloth and pierce the circuit of the sawtooth in that bone from all parts with a fine thread until the location is amplified by the sawtooth, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the sawtooth is inserted into the skull bone and has already processed in one of the intestines of the brain, and appears in the patient with those accidents that I have mentioned, then abstain from extracting the sawtooth and leave it there until its own equilibrium is established after several days; for if the sawtooth pierces the cerebrum, then death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the suture is not fixed only in the body of the bone but also penetrates into the periosteum, and the patient suffers for several days without any cause of those accidents, then you should remove the suture and the patient.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	However, if it is necessary to remove it and does not obey your extraction, then you should administer tartar in the circle of the suture as we have recommended, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	However, if the suture is already buried in the body and is buried from the sensation, then you should examine that area, and if you feel it, then you should insert those instruments that are suitable for its removal.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it through the constraint of the plague and the length of the bone, and there are no nerves or veins, then you should make an incision on the bone until it is amplified and it is possible to remove the suture.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have those instruments that should be held, then you should remove the flesh in which it is fixed from all parts and do everything possible; and work on that, if you cannot on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the bones and the torsion of those until it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you administer the extraction of the stone from any location where it is, then use a forceps in your hand and a forceps to all parts that fit into that obesity; and subtlety is important so that the stone is not broken and that it is made to your difficult attraction of it and that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do it at that time, then leave it for several days until the parts that are in its circle can be scanned, and then repeat that which is usually done.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you have difficulty with the flow of sand, then administer what we have said about cure in its capital.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your skill of incision of vein or nerve or cord, and administer it in all possible ways of the escape of the stone; and do that which facilitates and tranquility and delay and closure as if it were and to your recommendation.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore that you do the opposite of the stone so that the patient is in the figure according to which you must make the extraction of the stone from it, which is more useful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If you are unable to do that, then administer what is possible through figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	If the bones that are not in their proper place, or if some part has already been moved to another part, or if the external part of the bone is gilded due to the pressure of the part below the proper bone and sometimes also above it; then you cut on that part; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and after that, draw it out, as it is made loose by that.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bone, then twist the blade according to the opposite direction until the bone enters the blade, and widen it as much as possible, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for several days, and then extract it when it is possible.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the bone is in the blade, then push it out with the blade.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the bone has fallen out and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it into the blade, if it is deaf, strike the hollow so that the hollow of it enters the groove of the blade and then push it out with the blade.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the spine is convex, then you should push against it with that instrument going deeply into it, because the spine is relieved by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the spine is poisoned, then you should carefully hollow out all the flesh in the place where it is located, if it is possible to do so, and then cure that with that which is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the spine is catched in the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is close to where you touch that with the tent, and if it is possible to cut over that, then cut over that and be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, and remove that, and after cleaning the wound, then cure that before it becomes healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The shape of forceps with which the spines are grasped:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their ends are shaped like the beak of an eagle, which is made with a saw when they are placed on the spine to prevent it from slipping.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those there are special types, large, thin, and sharp, according to the quantity of the size of the spine and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and its construction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of applying a concave device to this extremity with the pain of auscultation in order that the instrument of the stethoscope is placed on it, and the thrust of that deaf one:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of applying to a deaf extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	with the pain of auscultation in order that the instrument of the stethoscope is placed on it and is applied to it:
De fleubotomia de las venas.	From phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy of which it is customary to bleed, of which there are 16 in the head, two pulsatile veins that are near the temples, called alhasisain; two herbs that are on both temples; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two bones that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guidegi that are at the collar; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are also other veins below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	May the veins that are incised in the armpits be visible; one of them is cephalic, and it should be located in the wild forest; the people call it "the head vein", and it is deaf, and it is migratory, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that one to the people "the vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein that is placed in the domestic latrine, and it is called "citillar", and they name that one to the common people "the belly vein"; and the nerves of the arm, and it is placed over the fire, and it is the one in which it is incised, and it is the one that appears on the foot for apparent manifestation; and the salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the small ear and the smallest, and it is in the two armpits.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the thigh there are three veins; one of them is located behind the curve of the wild forest's buttock; and the second is sophena, and its location is behind the thigh domestic; and the sciatica vein, and its location is behind the wild forest's buttock; and in the thigh there are other similar veins.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The lesions of the veins that approach the ankles are ancient and migrant, and saffron and ulcers of the bad head old.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of saffron those is second that I recommend to you: it is that it be shaved on the head of the patient, and it be rubbed on the head of the patient in the occipital region where the veins are thick with good friction; then strengthen the patient with their own collar around which appear the two and the places of their so approaching the ankles in two places depremegutz of the head; and ask that one with the tie, and if you feel the legs of those with the tie, here shave them.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the cutaneous needle, and it is that which incises, and then you introduce that behind the vein in the sinus where the gland comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand over the vein and the sinus to the parts above and incise the vein at the incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be the thickness of two fingers or about that amount; and make it as deep as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then apply strong powder and leave it in place until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already preceded at the beginning of the book, the incision and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Of the two veins and arteries that are above the temples, the jugular vein is ancient and sinister, and it often has a thick and corroded wall.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of fleubotomy for those is as follows: press the patient's neck with your finger until the two veins appear at the feeling, and manifestly show their pulse behind it; and then you should examine.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you should raise the ligature above the vein at the parts indicated by you, and insert the bleubotomy incision behind it, and raise the vein up; and make an incision in that way as you did in the other veins; and make it as deep as your necessity requires.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Approach the patient's clothing and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place it on that side and press and strengthen it with forceful compression, and leave it in place until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And after their remembrance and those of others, begin the intake at the beginning of the free period.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Therefore, the venipuncture of the vein in the forehead is approached by the venipuncture of the cephalic vein at the ancient malformations of the face and the emigration and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of that venipuncture is as follows, which I recommend to you; that the patient stretches their neck with a curved band that appears to be the vein; and then take the instrument called the fossor, which has this form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the point at the top of the fossor on that vein and strike it with a hammer or another cause in the manner of the patient, and leave it to run until the desired amount; and then approach the puncture of the patient and strengthen it where it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Some women use a spoon made of iron, but not that the spoon should be of sharp extremity like other spoons, in front of the edge, and spoon across the transverse, where the bone is prop and very easy to break with the spoon when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The swelling of the two veins that are at the lacrimal of two eyes due to scabies of the eyes and tears in the eyes, and to the diseases of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the spoon is that the patient holds their head in a bend, and then place the spoon there, and you should be standing over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the spoon should be made across the transverse length a little shorter than other spoons, where there is no meat; and if the spoon is subtle, very easily its extremity will be broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then run cold water for as long as it is necessary, place your hand over those places, and strengthen them with a newt, and then remove those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	When the swelling of the glands in the nose is associated with acute fever, and violent thirst, and facial maladies such as emaciation and pain, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the swelling in the nose is that the patient bends their neck and brings their own nose to your left hand, and takes a thin needle and inserts it at the second straight part of the bridge of the nose, where the vein does not appear to the touch, and where the sinus begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	While you slowly move your hand with the needle and let the sinus flow according to your need; and then cover it with a bandage, where it is restored more quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	When the swelling of the glands in the groin is associated with contraction of the lymph nodes, and the beginning of leprosy and other maladies, and intense itching and painful corrosive ulcers, as in herpetic conditions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the swelling in the groin is that the patient bends their neck and brings each one to their own collar; and the artist is on the head of the patient, and the patient is lying on a cushion.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Approach the vein with a small forceps, slowly and gently; then extract the necessary amount of blood or as much as needed; and do the same with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Approach the vein with a scalpel and tighten both veins with a ligature to prevent the patient from being harmed, and leave it in place until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The use of venipuncture in the mouth can help to treat small abscesses and pustules, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and also bad ulcers that are located in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the venipuncture is that it makes the patient feel better, and it tightens the neck by making a band around it, and then rotate the lips and look at both veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the color of each of them, and that which is more black in the area around those veins is more effective; and then incise each one from the beginning.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you have any doubt about which of those is correct, and you do not know which of them is right, then you should look at the most obvious one of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make a similar incision on the two veins that are above the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	If it is customary to cut the two veins that are below the lips.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	If it is not customary to cut the two veins that are below the tongue, then approach the lancet of the cephalic vein at pre-determined points that are in the throat, to the patient's uvula, and to other parts of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of puncturing those veins is that you should follow the patient's breath between your hands and lift their tongue, and then look away from the tongue, from one side of the vein and from the other side of the vein, and the color of each becomes darker.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then puncture each one; and be careful that your hand does not touch those veins, because they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are punctured in the groin, which run through all men, and the puncturing of them is done in two ways, either they put a small needle or an olive oil drop at a slant; or they cut the veins with a scalpel, and if it bleeds, they apply pressure to stop it.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	This pressure is what is suitable for sectioning and from those that are special and thin according to the size of the veins and according to the thickness of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of puncturing with a needle:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	If it is thin like that, and suitable for opening convex veins full of thick blood, and those that contain a lot of thick blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of puncturing with an olive oil drop:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this is of smaller width and more subtle tip, and suitable for puncturing thin veins that contain a lot of thin blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	And the greatness of the puncturing of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: that it extracts the blood from the gut and the spleen, and from that which goes to the chest and stomach.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And call the phlebotomist, when phlebotomy is needed there, who should guard that and be anxious in that, where the artery is, and if it errs and adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy, incise that artery and cause blood flow from the vein, so that no phlebotomy is done there without the phlebotomist's consent, before they cut with an incision.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the vein does not appear due to its manifest position, then let that be and move to another place, or surround some of its branches; or perform phlebotomy in the place of the elbow, where it is manifest; and cut that with an incision as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	However, if you want to perform phlebotomy in the forearm, then let the structure of the arm that you touch the location before you know the location of the elbows, and place your hand over it; and lean the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision as we have said; and be careful not to strike the area near the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you see, as you tighten the bandage, an inflammation in the place where you should feel a pulse, that inflammation is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flowing in the fleam as thin as a child's pin, and the blood is subtle, then know that it is from the artery; and then cover and press the wound with your hand for a long time; and remove the hand, and if the blood is stopped, then you strengthen the arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Guard the patient from the mouth of the wound, and be overly cautious about it and do not move it for several days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the blood is not stopped, and you must not present any medicine to it, then you insert the artery, if it appears to you; because its end is contracted, and the blood is stopped; or take some forceps, and do that, and take the other one and strengthen it over the location of the vein and the pulsils until the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	If the wound is abscinded, it is healed; if not, then cure that same wound with the remedy mentioned earlier for the location of the powders to abscind wounds.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The abscission of the wound from that location is difficult due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of the tendon of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the dark vein is punctured, the bleeding is greatly reduced by removing the wound from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the chest; for this reason, it is composed of basilica and cephalic arteries, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And tell the one who is very afraid of the puncture to the bleeding, that it is not a nerve; and then adjust the puncture of the bleeding and avoid the nerve, which will cause stupor, and the healing of this wound is difficult, and it may not be completely healed, and this nerve appears as a thin thread in sensation; and if it is hidden from other people and is subtle and not shown, then tell that person to place the bleeding puncture at the section of the silk, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then puncture the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of venipuncture of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and relieves the symptoms of the hands.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this case, if you want the venipuncture to be done with a syringe or with a needle; because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not cross the artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you should keep in mind that the venipuncture should only puncture the capillary area around the elbow, and not at the elbow itself, and not note the location if it is not above the first percussion point where some capillaries are located.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, in some men, it is more common to have an abscess at the elbow when it is not venipunctured at the first percussion, and not noted in the same place as the abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of the venipuncture in that area and its complications, in which you should consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first is of the type of cupping that you know is not administered except for the preservation of health and the hope of it and the caution of the onset of diseases, and that it should be done by cupping in one of the veins that are in the body, such as cephalic, fusca and basilica; and that it should be done by cupping at the beginning of primevera, after breakfast in primevera and autumn, and in winter at dinner, when signs of replenishment appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And it should be done by cupping on the third day or at the first time after three hours have passed since sunrise.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	More cupping should be administered when it is convenient and necessary for that, or at night or during the day, at all hours and in all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And the type of cupping that should not be administered until after the age of fourteen, and women should not be cupped except from the fourth month until the seventh, and the elderly who have passed sixty years should not be cupped.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, they should apply a leeches on their veins during the phlebotomy, and keep a motivated person near them, so that the veins do not spill over with superfluous blood in the phlebotomy of the veins, which are pure, and do not damage the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And those who have not been phlebotomized should not be phlebotomized if they are suffering from dysentery or cholera, nor should they be phlebotomized until they have recovered from that illness, nor should they be phlebotomized if they are suffering from hydrophobia. And moreover, phlebotomy should be avoided in cases of colic, vomiting, stomach pain, and multiplication of coughs, work, exercise, or eating too much, or staying up late, or any cause that dissolves the virtue, whether it is corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And also consider the elimination of humors during that time if the person is heavy, with meals and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And if it is appropriate to insert into the wound and no cause prevents, or it is exercised by some exercise so that the wound is narrowed.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And place the bandage on the chest of the day, around the time of noon, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And perforate that the chest of that is kept on that day from all animal injuries, as we have said, including anguish, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as we have said, including labor and excessive pain and cost and similar things to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at their side, make it present the causes in the use of which they usually have men with aromaticity and odor and baths and similar things to those according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the bandager on a cushion that is put or that the cushion of which should be bandaged.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And if it is appropriate to remove his arm, and rub that with the hand of the bandager two or three times; and then tighten the bandage around the wound and wrap those two or three times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the structure is cold, when it is not equal, or the structure is superfluous, then prevent flow from the wound; or it is a softening, and then prevent the body from the wound entirely.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And if the structure is approaching, cover that which should be flushed with the hands together between their legs where the veins are inflamed, and declare it to the sense.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And if the flensing tool is approaching, place the flensing tool on the side of the vein, over the area where the flensing is to be done, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is set so that from the veins which are there with corda fugent from the flensing, and those which are full of blood when placed on that side are contracted towards the flensing tool, and it is discovered; and if the flensing tool does not touch the vein, and if it touches, that is tight.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for that reason, let the bleeder be stopped and relieved in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then, if the vein is punctured in a crooked place, then you should do so; but if not, repeat it in another crooked place nearby that location or over the wound, if the location is not infected.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is infected, or the patient becomes feverish, then you should leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the wound, because it would easily become an abscess, nor would it enter into suppuration.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then, if necessary, repeat the bleeding if the patient allows it.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the puncture is small and bleeds slowly, and you fear that it will not be enough to get the desired amount of blood, then you should repeat the bleeding in that place again with accuracy and adjust a bandage on the wound, and do so until the location becomes infected, because the location becomes infected in some people due to too much blood loss.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	If that wound has already become inflamed, do not touch it, as it may have some cause; and place a piece of cloth over that part of the wound to prevent it from spreading to the body.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is best in this case to use oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, administer oil to all phlebotomy in which phlebotomists draw veins from the prohibition of blood from the body, and perform that Tyrian alfadoc and sagzenea when it is placed on the one of those over the area, as the body is subtilized and rotated when it is large.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the area of phlebotomy a large abscess is formed, as vegetations occur, and especially to that which has not been bleeding but only vegetated, or in the puncture of the vein little, and then you cover it, and place a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen it for an hour, as it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And then do that close to the opening of that vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is any blackness or greenness in the area, do not do that; and if you wish, place something over it to help with healing, such as a poultice of honey and milk dissolved together, or some cause of success, such as suc of menthol or calamint or a similar substance.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Move the vegetated accumulations and elevations to be punctured with a lancet from the basicilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand over that, and if you feel softness there, apply pressure to that area, because that elevation is bad and bad; and so be careful that you place something over it that we have said, which will help to stop the flow of blood from the vein.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make an astringent remedy in that area, so that the area will be tough, and then cure it with another cure within which it will be healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And then draw out the blood from the vein to all of man according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color of the blood that remains over the vein after it has appeared.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the bone is black, leave it inside until it rots; and if you see it swollen, leave it inside until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, leave it inside until its sharpness is dulled.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if the person is tall and strong and has a need for bone extraction in a journey, then the fluoroscopy of the vein should be amplified and the fluoroscopist should be left-handed.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in those who are thin, do the opposite of that, and if you extract it in a journey, then make sure the trail is straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best thing to be administered in fluoroscopy of the vein is that it is a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of fluoroscopy saves from bone fragmentation and initiation of nerves, and it is more praised and safer than second-latitude and longitude fluoroscopy.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in the case where syncope usually occurs during fluoroscopy, and if you cure that by giving them a small amount of warm infusion of milk or simple oximel; extract it from the bone in three journeys or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is complication of complexity, then take the fumigation bath to inhale essence of myrrh or essence of honey aromatized with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or essence aromatized and a fragrant odor.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if the fumigation bath causes sincope, and its cause is the sudden loss of blood, then take water of meat and honey aromatized with a subtle fragrant odor; use aromatic oil, and let it be applied to their chest.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of sincope for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to bring their arm and dissolve their second bleeding, take the fumigation bath for great evacuation, and its virtue is free, which evacuates the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of its virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	When one wants to perform surgery on their arm, and they are unconscious, and their heart is strong, then do this procedure around seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	When one wants to draw the intestine out of their body against the direction of the part where it declines, it should be done on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When that person's heart in which there is great pain and inflammation of the intestine, and fever, it should be drawn out of their body in a slow and gradual manner, with great effort and amplification of the incision, before the person dies from shock, so that you have preserved all the conditions of bloodletting; and that your hand is placed on the side of the heart of the intestine, to prevent them from dying from shock, which can happen when the bloodletter is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not do when you want to remove the arm and evacuate the second intestine, as soon as the orifices of the vein have been closed and it has been difficult to remove from the intestine, that you press against this with great force and bend it excessively, because that is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the left arm inserted secondly; or remain there with the sharpness of the fleam that is coagulated from the vein; or pause on that of tyrian sponge, or of sawdust, and compress it within that so that the vein is not cut.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, leave it there and do not touch it until the inflammation is subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary to remove the pus again, and there is no excuse, then draw it from that place or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis del bras" is bled from the back or the neck, when they are not discovered or hidden, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the bleeding from that is that the patient introduces their hand into cold water until the vein swells and appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then strengthen it with that bandage over the area of the stricture; and bleed from the vein transversely, not horizontally or lengthwise.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And your incision should be wide and your forceps should be sharp, which you use to grasp the joint above the knee.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if you are prohibited from using drains, then you should elevate the leg and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve your purpose.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you should be excused from elevating the leg in water until it is healed, and the same applies to the chest of the patient in water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The forceps used for this vein are safer than all other veins, because it does not have a pulsating artery or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The forceps used for the calf of the leg are similar to those used in the thigh.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of these forceps is that you should grip the leg or your hand, rather than placing it in water until the vein is inflamed and demonstrated at once; then use cross-forceps to cut it. If you do not see anything in return, do not remove it.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And do not place your hand on the patient's throat, as it may press against their exposed nerves.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then repeat the process in the lower abdomen, as if you do not repeat it there, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted according to the amount needed, then place your hand on the vein opening and salt, so that it does not solidify continuously; similarly, make sure you do this in all straight lines.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The swelling of the patient's throat from your hand is similar to the illness of the plague.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same in the patient's throat as you did in the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The swelling of the jugular vein from the throat is similar to the illnesses that are in the part below the chest, such as the illness of the breast, and retention of menstruation, and the illnesses of hernias and ulcers of the thighs and abdomen, and their similarities to other illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the foot bath for him is that the patient puts his own foot in warm water and makes friction on that friction until the veins appear; and ties over the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the location of the vein he takes out from the same place, and from there branches out in the surface of the foot many.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then do the widest branch or after the cushion tie the bandage from the same place, which is better and more salty.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you make the foot bath on the surface of the foot, then guard yourself from the nerves that are left over that surface of the foot, and pause your foot bath with the one you made through the other, as if you wanted to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the foot bath be yours.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the emission of the sperm is prohibited, then you rub the foot of him in the warm water and let the sperm run through that friction until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the foot bath maker errs in the first attempt, then rub the foot bath on his one side, which is salty; and do not fear from him, but guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, make a cushion for the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic vein, the place where we have said it is, you should place your hand behind the Achilles tendon of the posterior thigh.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the juice of the poppy flower from there is for pain in the hip when it is used as a caustic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the poppy flower from there is that the patient enters into a bath, and quickly and strongly massages the cushion of the calf under the Achilles tendon of the thigh with a long subtle band, which does not appear otherwise.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And then when it appears, you should apply the poppy juice to each wound that is possible and according to the transverse direction, which is better; or incise those at the beginning or remove those at the end, because the place of there is salt.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most men not immediately apparent; and if you apply that, and it does not appear to the sensation of all, then apply some poppy juice to part of it, and that which appears on the back of the foot in front of the heel and the ankle.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow out as much as you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then remove the stricture and place your hand over the area of the herniorrhaphy to strengthen the area, which is usually healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of the symptoms and uses of those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Symptoms are of the head, or of the eyes, or of the face.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Symptoms are made in two ways: one is by incision and extraction of blood, and the other is by making incisions.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This symptom that is made by incision is done in two ways: one is by burning, and the other is by making incisions.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the symptoms that are administered by incision and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body, of which the first part where they are placed is the neck, and the last part is the back; and the middle part is two parts of the collarbone; and symptoms of the jaw below the mouth; and symptoms of two spoons; and symptoms of a louse, and it is on the sole of the foot; and symptoms of two tweezers, and they are of two bones; and symptoms of two combs; and symptoms of two cushions.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And do not extract the sanguineous fluid from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason, no virtue is gained for those, as it would be if it were done by phlebotomy; nor should one think that ventozacio should be made with fire or with hot things in any bad condition made for compression between the time when the whole body is completely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If it is necessary to cause ventozacio for bad condition or continuously, administer it throughout the hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of the day and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	And the cause of which is that among men there are those in whom blood multiplies within them before the necessity for extraction by ventozacio and atroba in their own head gravity and soda; and of those who atroba compression and pain in their face and in their head, and in their neck; and of those who atroba pruritus in their face and in their forehead and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and of those who change the location of their ventozacio; and of those whose taste is multiplied; and of those who have sanguineous fluid in their mouth, or that their tongue is swollen and excretes blood; and of those whose sleep is multiplied, and of those who have blood in their sleep pain and old and scabs and other causes similar to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when in any of those cases, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth toe, then command that a fomentation be made with warm water that has been passed through a day or two hours ago.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And it is important to apply the fomentation to the back of the neck because when it reaches the weight of the head and that which flows to the feet, but it is important that this be close to the entire evacuation of the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this fomentation is in the location of phlebotomy of the cerebral.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not recommended to use that which is of simple complexity, or in which there is catarrh, as it gives great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason it is not recommended to use those of old age, and in the heads of which there are illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But to that which is continuously on it is made forgetfulness; and for this reason it is recommended that you command the fomentation maker to place his hand a little above the fomentation at the parts behind, so as to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	May the ventricle of alcohol be in the place of fleubotomy of the femoral vein and the basilica: and for that reason it is compared to asthma, and to the constriction of the lungs, and to the opening of the stent of the lungs, and to coughing, and to the reflux.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And cover that the ventricle of alcohol is small, and if it is placed underneath, it causes weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the ventricle of alcoholic ginger compares to accidental pains in the head and to obtuseness, and migraines, and prophylaxis, and to pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of fleubotomy of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And cover that you command the ventricle operator not to press his hand during incision so as not to pierce the artery and cause bleeding of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the ventricle under the jaw compares to alcohol in the mouth, and to corruption of the gums, and to similar things like those that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of fleubotomy of the herb that is in the upper lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	When the ventilation that is made on the two spoons is compared to a cap, which is made for the collection of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of the two parts taken from the forks is greatly compared to the phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, femoral, and cephalic, which draws out all those small veins that are in the flesh, and those smaller veins of the other larger veins until it reaches the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the ventilator not to process too much in incision, because the area is exposed to flesh, and then leave it with its nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And there is a ventilator that is blown over the buttocks and compared to the hemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcers that are left.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it is ordered that the ventilator be a large one, and of iron, because the area requires strong separation; and it is necessary to have subtle ventilation and be incised with incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	When the patient's bed is too low, it causes the spine to arch, relieving old pains of the kidneys and bladder, and provoking menstruation, relieving constipation and abdominal pain; and it is in the place of a fleam for drawing blood, a catheter, and a clyster.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, if the bed is too high, it causes weakness in the whole body and leads to syncope in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the beds of many people, the clyster is applied to the anus of those beds.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the beds is that they are placed at the beginning of the day and cooled by sweating, and do not prolong the position of the beds, but pause them frequently, and keep them cool frequently, and let the humors come to the place for equal advantage.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already reddened and swollen, and that the pain of the spine appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you should shave and incise the skin little by little, and then consider the position of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that person who has thin flesh and is prone to ulcers, you should shave and cover the area with a pad, so that the wound does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the ventilator to facilitate the incision and make it easier.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the skin is thick, then shave twice, because in the first shave, you open the path to the underlying tissue and its moisture.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second shave, you perform the exploration of the thick skin.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the skin is very dirty, then make a thorough incision in the third shave to clean it.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract the skin little by little or in small pieces, we need an incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a large piece of skin, make a large incision; and if we know that the skin is thick, then shave it with a preliminary incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term for incision in which the depth of the wound is only to the extent of the suture.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the one whose wound is thick, tough, black, and its pores are straight, then it is advisable that the places of the blisters be made less, more open, and more resolved; if it is in summer, with olive oil of aloe or olive oil of violet, or olive oil of amellas dossas, or olive oil of cement of jaw; and if it is in winter, then with olive oil of narcissus, or olive oil of lily, or olive oil of camomile, or of sanc, and similarly.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick, rough, then it is advisable that the oil be made of amber, or olive oil of balsamita, or olive oil of aloe, or olive oil of anethi, and similarly.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the ventozador is of wide pores of thin flesh, then it is advisable that oil be prohibited from it, and that instead the places of the blisters of them be washed with water of aloe or water of vinegar of solatrum, or water of jaw, or water of bordolaguas, and similar to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the patient's skin is of moist nature, wash his armpits with vinegar or water mixed with myrtle and similar plants.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the patient has thick sweat, wash his armpits with vinegar of ancient wine, or water mixed with marjoram, wormwood, or chamomile, and similar plants.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And cover that the armpit is kept away from the bath; having covered it, it should be administered nearby the bath for an hour or two, and it should be covered nearby the armpit.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is the remedy that should be used to regulate the armpit of a person who has been bled before underarm washing?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And cover that if the person who is to be bled or the one who will do the bleeding is irritated and sweats over his skin which is sharp and inflamed, then cover that he should take cooling causes, such as acetic milk, and vinegar with water and laytuga, and secanabin, and julep, and similar plants.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	Pause their meals which are present with spoons, and meat of various types, and cooked vegetables, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	From that which has a bad complexion, take borage root or borage from the sesame plant, and sumac, and mix it with some fragrant herbs between old and new; and that it should be recommended to use little of it in drinking and eating, and pause the foods of it with spoons and cane, and pickers, and small birds, and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And that on the day of the ox and the flute player, the drink should be greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And that it should be given in drink to some people at certain hours, such as alcohol from the Tiber river, or medicaments of musk, if it is muscated, or alcelita for the ox or flute player, or close, so that the main members are comforted and that the sickness is subtilized; and not that they should take that scalfatz.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May the wounds that are made be wounds that are placed on the fetus, and over the skin and gout, and over the umbilicus, in the places of the joints, and the broad part of the thigh, because these members do not suffer incision on themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those but for the attachment of members, such as a loose wound over the breast in case of blood flow from the member of the nose; and we use that which dissolves the wound's viscosity on the inside of the member, such as a wound on the belly and umbilicus; because that rarefies the member and removes it and relieves pain when resolving the wound's viscosity.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is placed on the ribs when they occur in their oppilation or pustule, because by the power of attachment strongly the pus oppilation and eradicates the pustule from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, when it is placed on the skin and flesh of those who are closed in them.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these medicines are administered only with success; and some are administered by heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered full of clear water in the patient's mouth.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	That is to make the water full and large, it is with cold water alone or water in which herbs have been boiled appropriately.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The form of the medicine administered by heat: its width is twice the size of the opening we have made; and the quantity of the powder is the thickness of one palm; and it is in the direction of the patient, in the place that is in the circuit, the thickness of the patient, the hole should be small according to the amount that fits into it with a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of wool or cotton, with large margins, lion, equal and smooth so that it does not damage the member in its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it should be at the edge of the patient's body, a wool or iron rod, where the candle is placed in the heat.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And now this great wind that we have recommended; and the lesser one of those that follow the diseases and the state of that who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the winds of children and weakened people are different from those of young people and large-bodied ones.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this wind on the member is that it extends the muscle with a decent amount of burning wood, and place it on the edge of the wedge transversely in the middle location of the wind, so that the fire is lit around the part covered, so that it is not burned by the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it should be placed on the patient's member, and the said herb on the towel that we have mentioned, until when we have the winds and do not demand that they open the said and that the vapor is over that towel, then the wind will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then rub the muscle according to its manner, and repeat that if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In the case of pleurisy, which is administered with water that has no transverse or horizontal line, and is not administered unless it is filled with water and placed on the member alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is the form of it: And this poultice, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodstained wounds are not administered to any members, but only to those in which it is impossible to position poultices, such as the gums and similar parts; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the nose and similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodstained, which are in the waters of cleansed mud.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And they should be laid in the day and night in water mud until they are famished, and that no cause is in the belly of those; and the body should be emptied at the beginning with the flebotomy and with poultices; and the member of the patient should be rubbed before it becomes red; and they should be placed on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and in labor.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	If it is possible to see the inside of the area with a wind instrument, it is more beneficial for examination.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, then wash the area with warm water and a cloth; and apply pressure and extract.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the length of the wound is extended, then approach the cavity of the bleeding vessels, and apply this water; then place a cold cloth over that which contains the bleeding.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the wound is multiplied, then apply powdered glass or similar substances to the causes of hemostasis, until the wound is closed; or place the most cooked beans on the wound and leave them until the beans stick to the wound, and then the wound is closed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repeated tapping of the bleeding vessels, when possible, change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the bleeding vessels are prohibited from suspension, then apply pressure to the area with recent wound or insert a needle into the locations where blood can be seen; and place them until those which feel some blood soon stop.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you want them to vomit, sprinkle some powdered aloe tribracteatum, salt, or ash on those parts, and they will soon vomit.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	And now begins the treatment of the third part: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, be wise and know that many foolish doctors and the common people and those who at some time will not follow the books of the Ancients or read one letter of them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason this method of the sciences on our earth is kept secret; and I have not done so at any time, but rather by the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science of those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then direct yourself to experiments and studies in the length of your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described all that is contained in this chapter regarding the greatest science and upon which the best experiment was passed; because it also broadens to you others and delivers from the occupation of elonguacio; and it also broadens in the end of broadening; and it shows in the end of declaration; and it forms in that several forms of the instruments that are administered in that, as it is done by addition of declaration, such as has been done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from the fracture of bones, from those that are necessary to mention before we begin the remembrance of the broken and diverse members of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters according to the understanding of which in the beginning the craftsmen and the station are laid out on the truth of those; so is you and those who know or learn this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore say that when something happens to someone with fracture or dislocation or torsion or hernia, then at the beginning you should cut open the flesh or separate it from that, or whatever, if no cause prevents, as if it has lost its strength, or it is the one to which it happens, or old in decrepitude, or it is time of great heat, or of great cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with eating fresh herbs and meat of birds and crabs; and prohibit fatty meats and fill it with foods and all food that fills the veins of sin, as long as you are sure of apostema caution, and if not fear effusion of matter to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their first usual position.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the bone begins to be restored, then feed the patient with nutritious foods that are thick and heavy in which there is viscosity, such as their foods made of wheat flour, water, rice, peas, cow stomachs, cheese, and fresh meat, and large and similar ones to those, and this regimen is done by coagulation of fracture more gently and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that when bones fracture in men who are in the prime of life and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature by the dehydration of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time by the dehydration of those members, and those that are from them at the end of the softening, such as the bones of the small birds.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Mayhem naturally adjusts and retracts over the broken bones of any part, similar to glue in which it swells and strengthens the entrance that is glued together and connected together, through which venom enters with great force and firmness, like fire at the beginning, through which no cause prevents it from completing its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason, it is necessary to place the instruments of the patient, instruments in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Great variety of fracture according to the variety of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you should know that the types of fracture are different according to the variety of the limbs, for the fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the skull; and the fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the arm; and similarly, all other members are different from each other.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have remembered the memory of all types of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinct from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Great variety of fracture in such a case.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And there are various species of bone fracture in their cases; some are curved fractures, others are longitudinal fractures; and some fractures of the skull and stars and additions and non-additions proceed from them, as is done when preparing to write, and some are simple fractures and disruptions in the head, and some are small fissures.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each species, there is a specific pain in the restoration of it after its distinct memory returns to its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Great difficulty in bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for that reason, bone fracture is known by the twisting of it, and from that elevation and appreciation of it to the sensation, and from the fact that it is understood at your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no twisting in the place and it is not made by the touch of your finger when you touch the bone in agitation and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is twisting or a small fissure, where you cannot reach it with your hand and compression of the entire area; place something on top of it from the medicines of which you remember at that moment, appropriate for the location; and keep it straight by subtle restriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	You should know that the location where it is curved and does not split into two or another, such as when the entire part of the patient's body is affected, at that time place your hand on the area to correct the twisting that has occurred post-aphtha cauterization.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess has occurred after cauterization, leave it for several days until it ceases; and then apply equal pressure on each method that you can by elevation and compression.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	You should know that the restoration of it and the cauterization of it is more likely to occur from the bone in which the injury occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then apply strength when that memory returns.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the injury is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this member broken into two parts, whether the hand or the foot; or your hand if the member is small; or two ropes or one rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And position your hand on the part of the body where you place the member equal to its natural shape, while the parts of the limb are stretched out, then pierce those additions that return to their places and according to each manner that you can in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful that your force does not injure the patient during your operation or its injury; and pierce according to your power that you apply one bone against the other as a companion according to the best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And be aware that in that hour you touch your hand at the appropriate time, and if you see any different cause here, correct it and equalize it according to the quantity of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as if they are foolish doctors who move too much can cause abscess by their operation, or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen that from their too much movement.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then annex, appropriate equality and decent operation and structure of that limb, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient about that and make him understand that it does not hurt him in the hour of his watch and sleep, and see his rotation and agitation, and devote his excretion, and all his movements to his whole skill; and wait until the position of the limb is a position in which pain is secure, which causes that when he feels in the disposition of the position of the limb or injury; then be aware that you change that to another disposition of that in which he does not feel pain; and guard that that position of his is straight and equal, so that the limb does not suffer tortuosity when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the structure of the broken limb is as I have recommended; because you know that broken limbs vary in their location, size, and shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, like the arm and the leg and similar to these, it is customary to cover them with very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And for those that are large, like the mattress or the pillow, it is customary to cover them with a durable cloth, because the softness of the cloth strengthens the large limb evenly and supports all parts of the broken structure without any damage.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then, as soon as possible, begin your equalization of the location, place a convenient bandage over that fracture, and cover it with three or four layers after the limb has healed; and strengthen your hand by holding the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then, as soon as possible, move to the most suitable part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen your hand so that it does not strain the structure that you have strengthened the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then, approach the location of the fracture with a bandage, and gradually soften the structure little by little, until you grasp a large piece of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then, take another bandage and wrap it around the other side of the fracture over the first bandage, and approach the bandages to the part further from the fracture; and your operation should be in the structure of the bandage and in the softening of the second one that we have mentioned in the first bandage.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then, place your hand between the bandages of the lion or cloth that is equal to the twisting of the fracture, if there is twisting in it; and if not, do not place your hand on any part of it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then, place your hand on the other bandage, and gently press it on these sharp bandages as soon as possible, if there is inflammation or pus in the location; and then place your hand on that which secretes the pus and which removes the inflammation; and leave that for several days; and then strengthen your grip on those.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And if the cannula of the needle is made of iron, and well formed; or of bamboo; or of palm ribs; and its width should be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the star that is placed on that fracture should be thicker and shorter than the other stars, and the length of the star should be according to its size and position; and strengthen it with another bend according to your first structure; and place a decent layer on top of it as we have mentioned about the structure, and that your structure should be according to the location of the fracture, and the longer it is from the fracture, the looser the structure.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And the threads should be made of thin and subtle silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of pulling out the fingers of cords from the wrong place, and it is a great error when the structure is not even.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And very thin threads are not convenient, because you will not be able to hold the structure together with them, and it is not good if there is a gap between each star.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is laid on their back with their extremities extended towards the edges of the bed, then place a pillow or a blanket made of lion or camel hair under them, but not so close that it causes harm.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are caused by falls, and accidents can disrupt the spine, and it is important to remember that in this case, the second particularity is in the capital.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not all members broken at first are straightened on the bed; this is because the member, when large, should not be placed on the bed for several days or seven or more, depending on your certainty of the risk of abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the method of plaster casts that the Ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and torsions.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of plaster cast similar to the restoration of fracture, suitable for complex cases and mainly for women and children, because it does not produce heat or chill: you should take powder of wheat flour, and the medium of the dough that prevents the movement of the mold in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if it is necessary to clean that area with an earswab, place the earswab on the non-spleen or subtle part; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for applying plaster to fractures and dislocations and torsions: recipe of asafetida, of lavender, of acacia, of enula, and of myrrh, which is made from a thousand times strong salt, of all of them an equal amount of drac. x; of marjoram and aloe an equal amount of drac. v; alochil an equal amount of drac. xx; all of their powders and cribbles and mixtures in water or with the earswab if the patient's condition is scalded; and then use this plaster, which is of good composition and restores the broken bones more quickly, and it confers strength to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for applying plaster that helps with fractures and torsions: recipe of myrrh and white poppy seeds an equal amount of drac. x; of marjoram and aloe an equal amount of drac. v; of acacia an equal amount of drac. vi; of Armenian bole an equal amount of drac. .xx.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All of these are to be ground in a large mortar with contraction, and their cribellae, and their comfits made from the water or the albumen of egg and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	The application of plasters to joints and bones separated from those places, and for accidental pain in those areas and fissures and fractures: take a strip of cloth and soak it in a mixture of vinegar and oil and place it on the wound.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	However, this plaster does not have the virtue of healing, but rather prevents abscesses and expels pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another way to make a plaster that heals wounds: take the bark of a fig tree and wild poppy; grind them together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Another way to apply a plaster for the healing of broken bones and when you want to resolve a long-standing abscess: take leaves of aloe, camomile, and flowers of violets, flour of eggs, all ground together; grind them all in a large mortar and make a poultice from them, if the limb is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is sore, then apply that wet cloth of cold or wet water and use it on it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of applying plasters that is stronger in resolution than the first one, when dealing with a long-lasting abscess: take herbs of althea and of linden, and of balm, melliot, majorana, flowers of viol, of camomile, of all parts equal; all should be ground and mixed with water or wet water or warm water, according to the quality of the limb and to relieve its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	You should not use Ypocras' own fat that is placed on the swollen limb to restore it, but rather a cerate made of wax and oil, and no other cause; and recommend that it be melted between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	You should not use Gualia that is placed on the swollen limb to restore it, and the causes in which exsiccation with small heat of temperature is good, such as mustard, garlic, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	The plaster for injury and pain: Take equal parts of mutton fat, honey, hair from an unshaved man or a pen full of feathers, aloe, salt; grind them with a mortar and pestle and make it into a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount should be adjusted according to the type of wound and its location; consider whether it causes pain or swelling, or if the bone is not broken, do not leave it for more than three days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If pain, swelling, or inflammation persists at the location, then change it in the hour, and leave the plaster on it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a cloth and sea sponge, soak it in warm seawater, and wash the location until the swelling stops and the pain is relieved; then rest the member for an hour; then place a wet bandage soaked in vinegar and olive oil or rosewater over it for a night, and bind it over the wound to prevent pus formation, and to reduce inflammation of the member, and to keep the pain away from it.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then gently repeat that thin structure and apply a small and not too strong plaster for your first construction, and gently enter that which is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and the swelling and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents have already disappeared from everywhere, and if there is no need for plaster or structure, then do so as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no harm has occurred to the member of those that we have said, then do not remove it for three days or four or five or six; and some waited for all this to be left for twenty days after you appeared by the removal of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and settles on the coagulation of the flesh on that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust in the structure more than in your first construction, and adjust in the growth of the food of the patient, according to what is preceded by its remembrance.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you see that the location of the fracture has already dried out and become more extensive than it should be, then know that the nourishment is prohibited from reaching that area; therefore, apply a cool water-based ointment to the entire affected area for three days; and allow the structure to heal gradually.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	If they apply other treatments to the fracture of the limb before it is fully healed, according to their own method, and then heal it according to its tortuosity, this is an error in their operation, and great fear arises; and if they do not follow this method, it will cause old injuries to recur and aggravate the condition.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	I have never seen any of them do that, so it is reasonable that they should not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter Two: Of Fractures That Occur in the Head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are varied, and their shapes are different, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures occur due to impact on the skull, which penetrates the skull, which is located between the bones, just like it happens in the bone, and for this reason, this type is called "ascial"; or the impact enters a part of the bone and also enters the flesh without passing through the skin, and this type of fracture is called "levatio absoluta".
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the extent of these fractures is great or small, and whether they are contracted or not; and the cause of this is a blow from a sharp object or a fall on stone, and similar circumstances.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is so deep that it approaches the periosteum which is next to the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the extent of these fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And whether the fracture is in the bone itself, at the thinnest part of the shaft, and for this reason this special fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And whether the fracture is caused by a fall or by a blow from a stone, and similar circumstances, which causes some of the bone to break into fragments, and it happens in the concave part where the ribs were when they were struck and their fragments enter the fragments.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This is more commonly found in the bones of the ribs, such as the ribs themselves.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And these types of fractures are often seen when the bones are separated like thorns.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will proceed to remove all that from its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I will detect all these types of fractures by examination and inspection of their movements and the rotten flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And a specific type of fracture is recognized by the bone that is exposed and cleaned, and it is applied to the movement, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider the symptoms of the patient at the beginning, and if you see through the symptoms that indicate clearly by manifest signs such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of understanding, abscess of the wounds, fever, and sweating of those, and similarities to their symptoms in major dispositions, these are not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see unusual symptoms, you hope for recovery, then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause of this is that if it comes to your back in the beginning as it is placed and that is in the days of winter, then you should study in the position of the bone giving the day fourteenth entirely disposed.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then you should study in the position of the bone giving the day seventh, having that which is left after the bone is corrupted by the pancreas, and that accidents which have occurred.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the pancreas covering the brain, and it is small and atrophied, then you should insert the minute and atrophied part according to what I will tell you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you raise the head of the patient placed, and uncover the bone according to custom and your ability according to the shape of the position, and that it is lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if an accident occurs to you in detecting the bone, flow of pus or abscess carefully, then you should stop at that and that which is covered, and that you fill the place of cloths infused in six and olive oil roasted, and make a pause in the position until it is sedated the abscess, and be sure of flow of pus; and afterwards begin in the circle of the bone and in the removal of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first method is that you insert the bone with a straight-edged knife, and this is the shape of it: And then administer another knife, slightly wider than the other; and this is the shape of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer the wider knife than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should have different knives of various widths, some wider than others; and some shorter than the others and sharp at the ends of their edges, and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion on the knife so that you do not cut the head and let it be.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is hard and tough, then pierce it in the circle of it by giving that you administer the knives called shallow nail files.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And those are not called anything else but that they do not penetrate the end of the bone at which you approach it, so that the nail file has a rounded end or edge over it like a margin or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the density of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient for you to take many of these sharp needles, as many as are suitable for each bone, until you have all the tests of the brain's extremity, which is sharp, in length and breadth according to the quantity of its spirit.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of needles: The quality of piercing through the circle of the bone broken is that you place the needle on the bone and rotate it as you pull it out until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the needle to another location, and pause it where the thickness of the ray or around it is.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert the thinnest possible needle between each layer of the bone, as we have said, until you have eradicated the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause to disturb the things that will appear at that point, such as forceps and thin needles.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be careful that the needle does not touch any cause of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so, when you have circled the bone perforation, and if it is continued with the same instrument, and then extract that, cover it with a cloth that is rough and unequal to that in the harshness of the bone, like an incisor, but rather more sharp and more delicate than the others.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there is a small fragment of the bones that are sharp and jagged, then take that which is suitable for that purpose from the instruments; and apply it to cure the wound with linen and find the ones we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is longer and more painful, which Gualia and Laurez say is very praiseworthy; and this is the word for it: it is necessary for you in the beginning that you discover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and most manifest, before you have discovered that part and placed behind it the end of this slow and gentle instrument of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And if the lens fragment is round and does not cause any harm, and the sharp fragment is located two fingers' breadth in front of it in length, as sometimes; then adjust the round fragment to the spheric power according to the position of the sharp fragment on the surface.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then, with a small needle, prick the surface of the lens fragment where it is thinnest, so that it can be easily rotated as if it were a disk, and make sure that the thread does not get caught in any way, and if the doctor was the most skilled of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If there is any additional cause attached to the thread of the lens fragment in other parts of the eye, then prick that part at the end of the needle with the lens fragment, and remove it easily, as it causes no harm and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the lens does not penetrate into the thread, and that which is abscised or remains on the surface is the face of the lens, and it is rough and has subtle scratches, then cover that roughness and remove those scratches with subtle razors that you have prepared in different quantities so that you can administer them in the most convenient places of theirs and the most correct of those after which you lost your operation on that lens that was broken and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	When you administer the remedy in your ratio, which you have prepared at the beginning with the most dilute of those remedies, and then use it close to the most subtle part of it, and do not cease to do so until you have administered the most thin and most subtle of all those remedies.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In all other small fractures of capillaries and subtle fractures, administer the remedy according to what you have lost for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is not necessary to study all of those that have been studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And you should follow what we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the wound is too large when you remove the bone, then you should take cloth of the second quantity of the wound, and immerse it in roasted oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and immerse it in hot roasted oil and place it over the first cloth and do this as gently as possible without causing pain to the patient; and then administer a thin layer of that, not more than the amount of the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Let this patient rest from this cure for a day or two until you are sure that the abscess is healed; then remove it and administer medicines that help to relieve excess dryness, such as linseed and flour of eggs, powder of aloes, aristolochia, and similar ones.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make these medicines into powder that is ground on the surface, if they are dry; and generally, administer all the medicine of which the property is to remove and not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful that the surface in your cure is not covered; and do not let it become engorged with blood or other substances; nor allow any virulence to be added to it; for when it is placed on the brain's membrane, it corrupts that and poisons that, and harms the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And consider in the crown of the head, as it is corrupted by that, and more when it is pressed during the cure of it, and becomes black on its surface; and therefore, know that it is dangerous for the patient.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If no other medical treatment has been applied above, and the effectiveness of that treatment depends on this one, then cover that part with a piece of cloth soaked in honey and four parts of roasted olive oil, and place a cloth over it; then care for that part with the appropriate healing methods until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the recovery of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You should know that the nose is not broken in two parts equally close together, or one of those few places where there are bones, because the part that is injured is cartilaginous and does not break, but only becomes bent, twisted, and swollen.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	However, if one of the two parts is broken, then cover that part with the patient's own nose, and use the appropriate method to treat that fracture, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And this should be done by you with great care, and remember that you should not cause any harm to the patient during your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and it does not allow for vision, then cover it with a small, round bandage.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the same as before.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And if it is possible to restore the bone on the first day of the fracture, do so; otherwise, approach the seventh or tenth day and remove the pus from the wound carefully.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert a piece of cloth or two into the tip of the nose, depending on whether the fracture is in one part or two, and fill it with enough quantity to block the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And say to the ancient restorers that the wounds should be filled with a border, and moved around throughout the day, but this is not my advice; however, covering the cloth with a piece of compacted almond flour powder will help strengthen the cartilage.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Sometimes, a splint is inserted into the nose, in place of a gag, to prevent excessive pressure or being wrapped in a cloth from the lion; and that you have already fractured the nasal bone more violently and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; if you want to do it, then do so, and if you want to, make splints.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another splint is needed for the abscess, apply a cerate or a poultice of calamine in vinegar and rose oil, or diachylon to the nose.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if there is no abscess, then cover that part with flour of starch and powdered egg yolk mixed with albumen of egg; and place your hand over the lion's mouth, and do not leave the nose exposed to any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are fractured by a small break or are crushed, then cover those with it, and remove those with instruments that are appropriate for them; and place this laceration, and cure that with what encases and consolidates, and with ointments that are suitable for it.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If there is a bleeding wound on the nose, then cover it with a bandage and administer a plug of plaster into it to stop the bleeding.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the treatment of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not open, observe whether the fracture is only deformed and not completely shattered and curved to the parts inside, then it is unstable.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Then, if the fracture is in the middle of the jaw, introduce your finger on the left side of the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, then introduce your finger on the right side of the patient's mouth; and push it against the soft part of the fracture inside, your other hand on the deformed part of the bone; and hold it in place.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then cover it with traction in two parts along the line to make it possible to align it.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a disruption of teeth to the point of breaking, then use those that you hope will remain in the form of gold or silver or lead; and place them over the broken jaw, and place them over the doubled cloth, and place a large stiff cloth made well, or a weight equal to the length of the jaw; and hang it above second according to what you have equipped with the lip and what is appropriate for the application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place a spoonful of lion's blood on his tongue.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then on the third day, you will remove and discard it; and correct what has been altered from it and apply that with powder of millet, album of egg, or flour of chestnut, before you have removed the wax of it, and place a lion's skin over the application.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then with this annexed and adjusted, apply it to the bone, and if the disposition of the bone has not been altered, leave it until it is healed and strong; for these three months, this fracture is strictly observed.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another complication occurs with an abscess, then administer the same medication that we have mentioned for other complications in the treatment of this patient, and let that abscess remain.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is severe, then consider whether the bone has separated or not, and if it has, then use the same instrument that is appropriate for removing those fragments from the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the orifices of the abscess are narrow, then use the forceps according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have removed those fragments and there is no remaining pus, then if the orifices of the abscess are wide, then open them; otherwise, place one of the appropriate plasters on it and cover it until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the clavicle when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Certain complications occur when the clavicle is fractured at the part where it joins the shoulder, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not match; and it is better for its restoration; or if there are accidents in the matching; and it is difficult to restore; or if the fracture is severe.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	In that case, the operation in which the fracture is severe, is to have two assistants, so that one holds the broken furcula and follows it, and the other extends the neck to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then align the fracture with the ribs called costal, and not in the prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if more extension is needed, then cover it with cloth or wool, and its size according to the amount of your need; and extend and elevate the furcula and tie the cloth in your hand until the fracture is aligned as desired.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot tie the end of the furcula to the parts in front, so that it reaches the preon, then cover the patient on their back, and place a cushion of medium size over the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant prepares the muscle of the patient at the parts that were entered before the bone of the furcula is raised to its place, and then you straighten the fracture and equal it with those called thighs.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel sharp pains from the furcula and its muscles, then cover that and remove those sharp pains for ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is held in the bone, then you will make an incision with one of the scissors that you have prepared for this, because you have placed under the furcula the instrument that serves the cipher; and this instrument is a saw or iron of which this is its form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And its shape is like a cutter of which this is its concavity; and its width should be according to that which you need from it, according to the size of the bone or its softness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	And its length should be according to what is possible for the operation; that there should be two ends, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the bone fragment is wide, and it is certain of abscess, then adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is narrow, or you fear abscess, then fill the wound with dressing and powders according to the amount of the wound's incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if abscess occurs, then insert a cloth soaked in warm oil and vinegar into that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the structure of the bone when it is wounded and cut, place a poultice made of flour of mold mixed with egg white on it, and place it over the lion's paw, and if necessary, place a humid cloth on it, which has been used by the Saracens, which should be long enough to cover the wound and about a palm or more; and then place powder doubled over the poultice and the bandage; and then place a thin tablecloth of the same width and length as the cloth; and then wrap that in a cloth, and then place that cloth with the tablecloth on the location of the fracture; and then place humid cloth as it is soaked, and roll it around the neck of the patient and behind the ear, and then reduce it over all parts, and when the structure of the fracture descends, and that is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And even though the bone above the broken bone is not shattered; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the ligaments become soft or you see that the bone has healed, then you should straighten it and strengthen the ligaments.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's pillow on their shoulder, and place another pillow under their arm to support the patient's arm in a slightly elevated position; so that the helper can raise the fractured clavicle to the elevation of the muscle; or the patient's arm is placed on the shoulder of the helper.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not move the ligament unless it happens in the place where the abscess is, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the bandage if you have seen the wound at that place, and adjust it in the stricture and restore it, leaving it until it is restored and the fracture of the clavicle has coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and supported according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some weeks are made in men of that time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of a fractured shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A splint is broken in the place where it was, not of it but of its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the place of it is broken — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare it and reduce it according to the natural figure in any way possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place powdered album of egg and flour on the place; and then place pulverized cloth doubled; and then place on it a thin layer of table salt according to the quantity of the splint or more than a small amount.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the layer is concave in any of the places of the splint, then you should level that concavity with flour, and then place the layer according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then apply pressure above with humid cloth and construction of the splint until it does not remain in its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament in each day; and all the time it is softened, apply another bandage and strengthen and equalize the position if it remains in its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the patient on their left side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the splint is restored in 10 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then dissolve the bandage, and know that it is from the bones of which the beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if it proceeds from the bone of the foot and place under the cord, then cut through it, and remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio of abscess caut if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The chest is fractured in some places of it and that remains unhealed; but the extremities of it are healed and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	When the bone is broken in that part, it inclines to the parts adjacent and accidents occur with great pain, difficulty in breathing, vomiting, and fainting; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of the bone is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a cushion placed between their shoulder blades; and then press on the muscles of the bone, adjust the ribs of the bone to double the position, and carefully perform the operation of the bone and its alignment according to all possible methods and what is appropriate for it, until the figure of the bone returns as it was before.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place a poultice and bandage over the broken bone, placed on a soft tablecloth or a calfskin and similar materials in elevation, so that you can wrap it in cloth; and carefully apply that to the broken bone so that it is not maggot-infested; and after some time has passed, strengthen that with a splint; and consider the wound throughout the hour, and when it becomes soft, strengthen that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If necessary, to cause the dissolution of that part of the wound that is healing or suppurating, or pain, or abscess that has occurred in that place, then you should remove and clean that part and eradicate the ointment and correct what has occurred due to the method of treatment of that person; and if necessary, return the ointment, if it is appropriate for that person.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the restoration of the ribs when they are punctured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You should know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in places as large as those that are situated on both sides; and from the extremities of which part they do not occur, except by those that are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And you should not be confused about the feeling of that person with the inspection of that person and the said.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it is equal to the fracture according to the method possible, within which it is covered as soon as possible, and then apply ointment and strengthen the broken bone in that place, if necessary for that person.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the rib fracture is declining towards the inner parts, the patient experiences severe pain and puncture, as if pierced by a needle, and because of this, the bones are covered with a bandage; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ancients used this method with great success.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	They say that placing a cushion under the patient's back, which generates inflation and ventilation, allows the abdomen to be filled and extended, and the fracture to be pushed towards the outer parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	However, we do not use this method because it may cause an abscess to form, if it does not occur; and if it already occurs, then it helps with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They say that it should be placed above the wound and squeezed with force; and this seems to be a reasonable argument, but it is feared that the bandage will draw the excess fluid to the area due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they said to them: cover that place with a wool cloth that has already been submerged in hot oil, and place powder between their ribs until it is full, so that the weight is equal to when you rolled him over; and then cure the patient with the care of pleurisy of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient experiences severe pressure that they have not suffered before, and the bones puncture the bandage, then place it over the patient, cover the area, expose the broken rib, and place your hand over the instrument that holds the cipher, the memory of which is preceded, and cut the bone to facilitate its removal.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the damaged lips of the wound, if it is large, with tissue, and cure that with ointments until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess forms, then cover it and push powder into hot oil and place over the wound, and cure the patient with that which covers the abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him lie on his left side while he is being treated until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the sacrum and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck and are attached to the spine, and similarly to the sacrum of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if such an accident happens to anyone and you want to know whether they will be healed or not, consider this: if the bones are already softened and stupefied and dead and cannot move those nor extend nor strengthen those and when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and feel no pain in those places, then know that they are not healed, and in such cases the disposition is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if the bones feel pain in those places and when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see similar things in the bones of the neck and want to know whether they will be healed or not, then consider their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you see that it has already softened, if those things happen to the muscles, and when you lie on its back, it becomes painful and the desire to urinate is lost, and some women faint on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and therefore do not attempt to cure them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If none of those things happen, the cause is better and less dangerous.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The cure for them is to prick the abscess with a needle that you place on the spine, or with a little oil of rosemary; place some women on their back between those days when the abscess is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the plasters that are comforting and existing, and strengthen on that side; and command the patient to rest and be calm and not sleep on the part where the pain occurs until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if the cartilage of the bone is torn or some other cause that has been separated from it, then cover it with a bandage and treat that bone; and adjust the edges of the wound, with stitches if it is large; and cure that with some ointment, before it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the back of the hip bone is broken, and it is at the end of the spine, then insert your left hand into the anus, and equalize the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible; and place a poultice and bandage on it if necessary, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel fractures in it, then apply that, and stabilize it, and cure the wound with the treatment that is preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the anus.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the anus are broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is only communication at the ends of those and are inserted in the length and decline to the parts inside; and the patient feels pain in that location and puncture, and the cushion is surprised when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that within which is over the fracture, which is its figure.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is only in the end of it, then you equalize that second one to which you are dressed for equality to enter as much as it is assembled to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the long or that has already declined to the parts below, then you make the patient lie on their stomach until they are prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have equalized that one, place your hand on the plaster, and place your hand on that star of wood or of codeine, and strengthen for stricture on the one that you do not fear puncture of fracture or removal of the star.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And equalize the concavity with that which places that one inside of which that one takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their stomach or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess occurs, then stop the extension of that one and of its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and place your hand on that which sedates that one according to what precedes; and then return to the restoration of that one, and strengthen that one with a cover.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if there are fractures or bones that are crushed, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the humerus fracture.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Humerus is that which is between the ribs and the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you grip it like this:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And if it is attached to two extremities of the bone, then suspend it from the raised location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on a chair; and when the broken arm is raised, it should be placed under the chin in the middle location where the curve of the bone is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And hang something heavy over it, or the nurse extends it to the parts behind; and the doctor should put his hand on both sides of the fracture, as soon as the fracture returns according to its shape.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other handwoman is that the patient should be placed on their back and support their head with a cloth; and then command two assistants that one of them holds what is above the fracture at their hands, and the other holds the pus behind them; and each of them extends to their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then press on the fracture with the cloth and on the other with another cloth, and each of the two assistants extends their part.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then cover that half of the cloth over the tendon and the other behind the fracture in the cavity.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly, if the fracture is in the cavity, then cover that cloth over that place and that cavity.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Equal to that with ease and work, and then when it is equalized according to what is covered and applied properly, then press that if no abscess occurs carefully.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If a boil occurs, leave the structure inside for seven days, and place a woolen bandage over it in a way that is neither too tight nor too loose until it heals, and then you should remove it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of removing it is to apply plaster over the fracture, and then cover it with a piece of cloth; and then adjust the arm on that supporter, and place your hand over the patient's muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And then cover the cloth and remove the arm from that supporter to prevent any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And then place that splint that is placed farther and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the thickness of the fracture, and the length of the splints should be according to the break plus three fingers of each part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then remove the bandage over the fracture that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is necessary that your structure over the site of the fracture be more straight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture becomes more elongated, the structure becomes smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you see the position of the stars and the structure as we have said at the time when you restore the member to its proper position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear pus, then leave the structure and the stars inside on day seven as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that it does not occur in the proper or inflamed place; or eating is prohibited from coming to the member due to disposition of excessive structure; and therefore, correct all of this according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are sure that no cause of this will occur, then do not remove the bandage for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And the patient's head should be on their side, and their hands should be on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place your hand on the assistant full of wool equally, and consider in all hour of night or day that the figure of the broken member is not displaced or dissolved, or that the bandage is softened, therefore correct all of this according to your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And pause the patient's food according to the order we have given, unless the food is delicate at the beginning before it starts to strengthen; and then cover it with a cloth.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For the custom of the assistant and the cushion under the patient, it is customary to strengthen them in ten days; and then cover them with a clean cloth and administer baths and medicate with the remedies that correct that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is not yet healed, then you should not remove the bandage and the splints within ten days or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is composed of two bones, which are called the radius and ulna; one is small, and that is the one that is placed on top, and the other is large and that is the one that is placed below, from the elbow down.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the larger bone is broken alone, or the smaller one, and if they are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small intestine is cut above, its repair is difficult, and its healing is even more difficult.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the large intestine below the fracture is cut, its condition is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse when two bones are broken.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is cut is the small intestine above, it is advisable for the doctor to facilitate its repair by making a small incision in order to make it heal more quickly.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large intestine is that which is cut, then it is necessary to make a larger incision more forcefully.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both intestines are cut at the same time, then it is necessary to make a stronger incision to remove them.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary to place the figure of the hand over the repair and extension of the intestine on a cushion, and the patient's arm should be stretched out above all the others, and the ear should be placed lower than the others, and the patient should be lying on a pillow.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion under the patient's head or back, so that they do not incur any further harm.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And the assistant should extend their arm on the side that is closest to the patient's shoulder or hair, and another assistant should do the same on the other side.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the doctor should set the bone as best as possible according to the appropriate figure.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are any fractures in the bone, then carefully remove all the fragments to their original location using your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there is a separate fracture that pulls the cord and does not give you hope of its restoration, then do what we have mentioned above regarding such cases.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is in the lower part, and you have already treated such cases, then take care of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then you should apply a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, and be careful to avoid both crudeness and subtlety, and place a strong cloth over that thin area until the abscess has been absorbed; then remove the cloth and apply a prepared poultice made of powdered mullein and clear honey, and place it on the area where the fracture is located.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you know that the number of bones in the arm is in the major positions, or if it is a fracture in one or two places at once.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your bandage over the location of the fracture as strong and as tightly as possible, and when more string is needed above the fracture or below it, place the bandage a little softer than what was previously mentioned in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft cloths, not hard or sharp, and the best one is the one that is strengthened just enough to move between being thin and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and the limb close to those days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs of which correction is necessary, as previously mentioned about the member, and then make sure that you treat the member with cold water before the problem stops.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And do not apply pressure to the member until it has rested, and then return the bandage.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the constriction has already been softened and the bone has been reset and resembles those, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if nutrition is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive constriction, then gently loosen that one and lay it down for several days until it can receive the nutrition, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If nothing has happened to the patient that is similar to those we have mentioned, then do not let it be discharged within 20 days or around those times.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And place the hand of the patient on their back to move them and make them sleep on their side.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or if it is strong, it is restored in 28 days, and all of this is according to the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of the skill.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the little finger and those.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	When the pinch of the knee and the joints of the said parts are in dislocation, do not force them back into place, but rather gently guide them with your fingers.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When the patient has a fracture or dislocation, make sure they remain lying down and maintain their limbs in equal position, and place your hand over the extended area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the assistant extends the broken bones and the surgeon aligns those that are not properly aligned with good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And make sure to apply a poultice and bandage, but be careful not to cause an abscess; and place your hand over the area according to its size, and you have already covered it with cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the splint is in the parts of the body, and it is made of cloth, and you command the patient to hold that part of their belly that is splinted, then stretch the cloth lengthwise.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the cloth that supports the body should be made of cloth, so that the body is applied to the palm; and stretch it according to what is covered.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the deformable parts, then place your hand on the other side of the part and turn it; and then place the structure, as if your hand is rolled between the mentioned bones.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if the fracture occurs in any of the mentioned bones, then if it is possible, equalize it as soon as possible and place your hand on the palm and if you wish, place a small cushion under it to elevate the fracture and not make it worse.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other mentioned parts, such as the one at the wrist, or elbow, or ear, or annular, then equalize and place your hand on the palm of the same side; or all of them continuously, which is better; or place a small cushion over it, as we have said in the wrist.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and apply that, the position of abscess and its opposite — during the operation — to what happens when any cause of those occurs, according to the report of it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the restoration of the broken bone in the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh are broken and are declared to be second-rate when they turn into the lower part and the most inferior.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of it is done as follows: the bandage is placed over the fracture and another bandage under the fracture, and the patient lies on their back and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the assistant extends the bandage to its end according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is directed to the upper part of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed at the end of the femur, so that the extension can be in sus, and the other bandage under the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	Similarly, if the fracture is directed to the upper part of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed at the end of the femur, and the extension should be at the parts behind.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor should gently push the bones that have separated from their natural position and join them together properly; then apply a poultice and bandage, unless there is an abscess in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	However, if there is an abscess in the member, then leave it alone for a few days until the abscess has discharged, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage of the member should be made like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and fold it twice or three times, and remove any excess; and then place the pillow underneath where it reaches the ankle and the back of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And introduce a long thin strip between the thigh and the pillow from the back to the parts on either side, and the ends of the strip should be spread out more widely than the two parts, and then roll it up over the pillow and the thigh where any excess hangs down from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place your hand on the thigh in the place of the fracture and place a stone on the bones of the pillow.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the empty spaces between the back and the cushion with many soft cloths, to prevent the contraction from coagulating.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin the strong contraction from above over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you approach the edge of the fracture location, your contraction should be smaller and more flexible and moister.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend two extremities of the field to the parts where it enters the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the strings from the other side so that the tissue does not remain in its own location.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then lay the contraction over that, so that it does not cause corrosion or abscess or inflammation and similar things to the member; and if any of those causes occurs, then you should remove it from there, and rectify what has happened as soon as possible, according to the methods we have mentioned.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if in the bone there is a bone that puts pressure on it, then you should equalize it as much as possible; and if not, do so over it and return it, and cure that of which the preceding remembrance is within the time when it will be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Some bandages are strengthened to this fracture of the thigh or other ones that would be adjusted to its bones, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in the restoration of it in such a way that it does not happen to the patient with gout; and if it is restored alone, another one should be applied to the other cushion, then it is necessary that he should quickly recover from that one.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the thigh is strengthened in 10 days or a few more or a few months, and all of this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder blade.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that the fracture of the shoulder blade occurs suddenly, but it does not happen to the other bandages around it.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it happens to the fracture, it is only a crack or tear in its parts, and that is a sign or signs, and over that all is based on the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it should be as equal as that which was broken from its parts due to the mentioned entries, and should be aggregated and joined according to what is possible for equality, facility, and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And if necessary, place a poultice on that round stone, and apply pressure to it; and strengthen the structure to this extent.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And if necessary, consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other fractures, such as an abscess cautery and similar to those that would be applied to this case according to what is suitable for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You should know that in the ribs there are two bones of which one is large and is called the rib bone; and the other is thin and is called the flame bone.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And if an accident occurs to those of the species of fracture that occurs to the two bones of the arm, and for that reason, the restoration of it is made according to the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If two bones are broken together, the cushion is turned to all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the most delicate bone is broken, the cushion is turned to the front part.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the largest bone is broken, it is often behind, and these are among the causes that you do not know about.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equality, and ligament of the stirrups according to that balance.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But remember, if the fracture of the bone has not been set properly, then the extension should be less and looser, and it will help your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the bone, there is a cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you equalize the splints and that completes the entire operation, then you will take weights of iron the one that is placed behind the causes that are placed in solely, and its eyes are made equally of white palm leaves; like those to which there is a small groove, and it is not from the hand, and it is the longest of those according to the longest of the bone, and the elbow to the farthest behind.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then cover each one with a sheet of cloth according to its length, and place one on the back of the couch of one side and the other on the back of the couch of the other side, and let them hang down to the lowest part of the bed.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the three sheets in three places of the bed extremities and at the middle, where this structure the couch is prohibited to lean on the right and left sides, and it is good for a good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then a pillow is placed according to the length of the couch; and let it be placed on the couch so that it maintains its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially cover what you do in fracture, and when it is properly placed.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the bed each day and study that which is behind for study, and you guard it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and if something happens of those, then stop at that which covers until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus and bones of the foot and those called.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Fracture of the talus does not occur in total; rather, fractures occur in some bones of the foot; and those called also have few fractures, and do not occur to them but together in the same position.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot have fracture and sometimes those bones are raised above each other, then place the patient on the prepared ground as if they were walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place one foot on that which is raised above those bones, and step on them, and press, and equalize them until they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then place a poultice and bandage on top, and place a small table under the belly of the patient with two flat surfaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then apply strength to that leg to support its structure descending, because you have covered it with bandages and other causes of which it needs.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And as three or four days pass, then you remove the bandage, where you find the bones equalized, or they are fractured or dislocated, and the operation in those is there with appropriate means.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If the patient says they are lame, then restore those, and level them with their eyes, and tell them to look at you while you perform the restoration of the mentioned ones in the arm.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place your hand along the length of the lame leg, and place another cushion under it; then move this table away from the patient, which was recommended to you, and strengthen that joint with a decent restriction.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If the bone is lame in two or three or more places, then you place your hand on each affected area covered with lion cloth, strengthen the table at the lowest part of the leg, and have someone stand on one of the ends of the table to press the abdomen of the patient to keep it well retained.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget all the causes that have been told to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have mentioned; and pause at all accidents that cover that.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the jawbone of the female and the bone of the patella and the shinbone of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the woman's cervix is broken, then perform that cesarean section in the lower abdomen, and then gently place it on the part of the back a little, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife should put her hand in the woman's vagina, and do it as she expects; and then the woman should be shaken, and her back should be lifted little by little, until everything is removed from the part of the cervix that is expected and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powder on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the bandage and allow her to urinate, and reduce it and return it to its original position, following the method by which it was placed at the beginning.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around those days, until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take one bladder of lamb and strengthen it over the opening of the woman with a cannula of a cavernous bone; and insert the entire bladder into the woman's vagina, and blow into the cannula until the bladder is inflated inside the vagina, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with cotton and bandaged according to the recommendations made, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bones of the thigh of a man or woman are fractured, then administer in the restoration and needling of that which we have recommended for the bone of the thigh.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is drilled does not remain hidden in these close fractures and that which occurs rarely, mainly to the one who has some study and uses and understands this my free movement; for that fracture means to you in the greater dispositions via drilling in the restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore understand be.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the wound of the man when it is fractured, take gauze, and put the wound in that; and place your hand over it wrapped in cloth, and be wrapped, and be left for three days or around those, and be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of bone fractures when it is broken.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the one who has suffered a fracture to have a large bone, especially if it is as large as the bones of the ribs or the scapula, or similar to those, that you should be careful and perform amputation as soon as possible if the conditions for amputation are present.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the pain continues, then you should make sure to retain it in any way possible, unless you powder it with three-thirds of sulfur, if there is another cause.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong it unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, before the abscess disappears, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause more harmful accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is protruding above the fascia, then make sure to pierce and reduce it, equalizing it with your hands at the most appropriate place and with minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not prepared and equal to the length of your fingers, then reduce it to the length of your fingers with this instrument; which is made of iron, its length being seven or eight spans and its width according to the extent of the wound; and for that reason, the surgeon must have three or four of these instruments according to the amount needed in treatment for all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be straight, and it should be in the pouch greased so that it is not bent; then place the probe on that during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should be sharp at the end where there is a margin on its extremities; and it should be thick underneath and thin above, and it should go into the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called "labre volentz atelarem" in Greek, so it is the pouch.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the tip of it is placed on the raised part of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	When the bone returns, fill it in with some equal amount.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then force the extremities of the fracture together, and if the extremity is thinly cut, and you do not take that tool for good reason, then cover it with the extremity of that bone where the instrument has power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone to its entirety, then insert that which is needed according to what we have recommended; or saw it with those scissors that we have mentioned; or press that which is needed in some way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then remove those that are in the bone of sharpness and small scratches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and if the patient feels great pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you have agreed with the patient for great benefit.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is completed, which you do for the bone, and then apply a bandage in vinegar black, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place over the wound or any other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not fester and rot.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And at the appropriate time during the complement of the bone's restoration, administer stelas and leave the wound uncovered to allow it to be closed with forceps and bandages according to the amount of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to strain the wound against the fracture, as this is what led to the death of many doctors, and it will cause harm to their thighs, either mortifying or corroding or rotting them, which is dangerous.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the patient's fracture is loose, mild, and different from the fractures of others.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear that these bad accidents will happen to it, as we have mentioned before, and there is great pain in the place, then do not cover it with those bandages, but apply an envelope of stiff cloth instead.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the wound begins to close after one or two days, as it will generate a scab, then remove the cloth that you placed over it and administer ointments, using those that we usually use to treat wounds, such as triple antibiotic cream and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is agreed upon that you should remove the bandage and consider the pain on each day, morning and evening, until it is consolidated and closed, and make sure that the member is prepared in such a way that the inflammation runs out of it to the parts behind for ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the pain lasts for several days and is not consolidated or removed from it by the arm, then you should know that here are some remedies to ask about the pain and try them.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And among those remedies, those that are separated and removed, those that are not separated and put on the member and cause pain, perforate them with those that are possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain becomes green or yellow, it is a sign of another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then make sure that you place one of those that are suitable for the cure of which there is a previous account in its own chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that in which you should place the best speech and you make present your foot: when the large ones are cut, raise it over the member as if it were the bones of the body and of the helper and similar to those of the great members, and do not assume attraction of it, nor the extraction of it, because many years have passed since it has been done; leaving that inside which is possible, because it will cause much pain for you if you approach it for twenty or thirty days; and then cure the pain if you see it, and if not leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the treatment of nodes that occur at the site of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Nodes often occur at the site of healing of a fracture, especially near the joints, and are formed by the shape of the member; and they strongly prevent the member from performing its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, consider whether the node is recent and administer in those medicines that have stopped bleeding such as aloe, and ensellia, and mirabilis, and seracollo, and acrasia, and similar to those; take some or all of those, and comfort them with a stiptic, or album of honey, or vinegar, and place that over the node in a cloth, and bind it over the node for good binding.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And loosen the bandage that does not let it out for several days; and remove it and apply another, until the node is softened; or strengthen it over that layer of plaster, which has the property of renewing all that is inflated in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the bone has become hard and calcified and it is necessary to cause pain, then cut it at the most appropriate part of the bone, scrape off the excess and eminent, or rat it with an acid resector until it is softened; and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the fracture is restored and the limb becomes thin and weak, it is not in its natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When the fracture of a bone is restored, and the limb becomes thin and weak, it is not done for many reasons: one of which is the lack of solution of the ligament and the bone of the member, made not according to its own time; or because of excessive stricture of the ligaments before nutrients are prohibited from reaching the limb; or because of excessive embrocation; or because of excessive movement at an inappropriate time; or because of weakness in the body of the patient and because of its debilitation.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to apply warmth to the patient and make their heart beat strongly until the pain subsides; and administer a bath, and insert gaug and lettuce on it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place a plaster on the limb, so that the plaster attracts nourishment to it, or continues to draw out the impure humors from it, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the treatment of broken bones when they are healing improperly and preventing surgery on them for this reason.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When an injury occurs to the limb that has already been healed, it is necessary to correct the deformity of the broken bone and the swelling, and to shape it in the form of the limb, but if the limb is not prohibited from its natural surgery, at that time you should not accept the word of those who believe that the limb is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But many foolish doctors and healers have done this in our time; and this operation is very blameworthy, causing great fear to the patient, which can be fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the swelling and stiffness are recent, then apply a poultice made of warm water in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as elderflower and willow bark, and melilot, and similar to those; and let it be made into a poultre for softening as is well done with diallaqilon; or let it be prepared from the crushed willow bark and let it be applied to that; or let it be prepared from pressed figs and let it be applied to that; and similar to those of the medicines that are named amermans consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some waters are dissolved in frequent light friction with the wettest ones, and let it be administered for movement of the limb at all parts in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the twisting has already become permanent and is very strong and hardened into stone and requires cure of that with iron, then apply the pus under the disease and let the continuity of the bone be dissolved, and let that which exceeds from the swelling of that bone be scraped off with a small saw, and let it be administered ease in that with solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is an injury to one of the joints of its body, which prevents movement, distorts the shape of the limb, and causes severe pain and serious injuries on the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when an injury occurs to any dislocation, it is immediately necessary to reduce it, and do not delay in reducing it, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very painful, and that is why it is difficult to reduce dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And to avoid this, it is not necessary to be too tight or stretched during the inflammation period, because mild movements cause spasms and slow pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When that happens, it is necessary to cover the patient's abdomen with a bandage, and wait until the inflammation subsides; then, apply cold water and oil to the limb, and reduce it with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the entire limb should be treated with the same thing that the memory will return to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the capital letters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the shoulder, enter into the part that has been left behind.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24:
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the cure of jaw dislocation.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the jaws are dislocated and not fractured; and the dislocation of the jaw is made in one of two ways: either they are pushed back into their places by a little movement, and become slightly mollified; or they are completely dislocated and completed, before they become mollified at the part of the joint where the saliva of the patient flows out and so that he cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his cheek.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of it is slight, then return it to its place in the greatest possible positions.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	When the dislocation is complete and filled, then apply reduction to it as soon as possible, and not be delayed for too long.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the patient's head, and insert the doctor's finger on one side of the jawbone near the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of the doctor equalize them; and command the patient to stop their jaws and remove those that come out from each part; and the doctor equalizes the jawbone and pushes it back into place before it returns to its original position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are frequently dislocated, then administer evaporated water and oil, until a ligament is made to facilitate the reduction of both jaws and not delay the reduction of both jaws altogether, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they are returned and equalized, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then place a poultice of cloth on those parts made of wax and oil; and apply it to facilitate the movement of the jaws.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And the patient's body should be lying on their side, with their head between two pillows, so that it does not tilt to the right or left; and do not force any cause; having the same view, remove the forbicio leon, until when the pain is relieved and the jaws are unclenched, then move that which you want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And that should be administered with ease, and do not force the opening of the mouth for food, drink, and breathing, until the jaw is unclenched and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated in some hour and are not converted to their usual places, then use hot compresses and frequent sweating, and strong laxatives, and the belly of the patient is heated, and strong laxatives and vomiting pure choler.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see that, then know that it is fatal; and those who suffer from that die within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and its extremity.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The clavicle is not dislocated from the side by its continuity with the chest; and sometimes it is dislocated at the front part, and that is felt.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And its restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then cover the area with a strong bandage, so it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place a poultice and powders on that, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The extremity of that which is bent and continues in that, is not dislocated on any day; therefore, cover it as we have said and according to what you have.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place a poultice, powders, and compression on that, and command the patient to maintain stillness and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the nipple and below.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, and that is difficult; and it is not dislocated behind the shoulder blade; and it is not dislocated below by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most commonly dislocated and deformed and stuck behind the nipple, and especially in those in which the flesh is thin, it is more easily dislocated; but in those in which there are many fleshy parts, it is stuck out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And it often happens to men who have been struck or fallen, and the muscle of which is inflamed with an abscess, and it is swollen by that which has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then you should avoid that you enter into that which is over-saturated with it, and then proceed in the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known as dislocation when the parts behind the tilt are affected; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the unaffected muscle, because there is a manifest difference between them; and you feel the concavity of the muscle cap and behind the tilt touch the cap of the muscle like a bone, and the patient cannot return their hand to its natural position, nor move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you must press or pull on it, and you should feel a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, a light reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the practitioner raises their hand to the parts above; and places their fingers behind the tilt of it, and strengthens the joint in its natural position, and the practitioner raises their hand and extends it over it; and places it behind where it returns lightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return, and from the beginning of the dislocation, for several days, the patient should be given a herbal bath that softens and loosens, like if they were cooked with herbs such as fenugreek, melilot, and linden in water, and should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back and positioned under the breast of the patient, with a pillow between them made of wool that is equally between elevation and restriction. And the doctor places their hand on the patient's thigh, elevates the head of the muscle by virtue, and pulls the patient's hand to prevent it from falling behind, while another minister holds the patient's head, so that it does not fall behind, because at this time they return to their place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is taller than the patient, and stand on the side of the patient, and insert his muscle under the pillow of the patient and elevate the pillow of the patient above the patient's stomach until the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from behind their stomach.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is heavier, then cover that which another cause is suspended, so that heavy one returns quickly, because the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced according to another method: and it should be placed on the ground a long stick with a round head, as if it were a mortar, which should not be too thick or too thin, and placed behind the patient; so that it should be placed over the head of the stick with lion's cloth, and the patient should stand according to the length of the stick, and extend your hand to the parts behind the other part; and extend the other part of the other part with strength, because the joint returns to its place at speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult for all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: and it should be taken a stick of the length of two fists, and its width should be four digits, and its thickness should be thinned at the tip according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place a lion's cloth roundly on the head so that the stick does not descend on the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And place it behind the tip of the patient, and extend your hand or arm over the stick among the parts behind, and tie the stick to the helper and the arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to its height, and extend the hand to the parts behind, and the other thing should be suspended from the other side, where the joint is soon entering.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument of the patient is completed according to each possible method, and then cover with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; and place a prepared paste of powdered mold and album of egg on the entire muscle, as it is rolled over, and place the bandage behind the wound with stricture; and the bandage should be rolled over the paste, and the hand of the patient should be attached to the neck of the patient, and let it be, and not be neglected by the hand of the patient for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And cover the food of the patient little, until the member is comforted, because it is more beneficial for the healing of the patient.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And the food should be given more frequently around seven or five and exercise a movement; and if it is stopped and not softened, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to humidity that has occurred in it or for another reason, then apply heat cautery three times, as indicated in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all has been done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the plaster and structure are reduced over it with some humidity, and it is not set, cannot be raised that arm to its parts above, then know that the nerves of which are at the head of the muscle, have been cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is made, the hand and breast or the parts behind, reduction is made by impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And apply the other bandage and cure that within which is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if serious injury occurs in the member and it moves slowly, then use baths with humidity until that gravity is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and if it is dislocated in all parts, especially at the part where the arm joins the body, and the dislocation of which is not seen from where it is, or behind the arm, and when you adjust the shoulder after it has been dislocated, if it does not return to its place, this is a clear sign that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you should cover the shoulder with a cloth, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible so that it returns to its place, because if you see the swelling at the joint, reduction is difficult and not always cured; and more so when it is at the back parts, for it is worse than all other species of dislocation, and causes greater pain, and longer recovery from that.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of which, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the dislocated shoulder should be extended to both sides, and the arm should be expanded, and the hands of the patient should be on the shoulder and behind it, and he should push the joint towards the palms of his hands, or at the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is at the wrists, then bend your arm and place your hand on their wrist, pressing against the back of their palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not respond to reduction, then apply strong extension and force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And if two assistants are extending the arm, then another two should hold it in place to prevent it from being pulled back during extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate the arm in all directions, wrapping it with a long cloth or bandage on your hand.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint at the wrist, apply some oil to help with the lubrication of the joint and facilitate its movement; then push the joint back strongly until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then apply pressure on the reduced joint with a pad that has stiption and execution against the album of blood, extend it downwards, and suspend the arm from the neck, letting it hang loosely.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then remove it; if the joint is formed in its place, then remove the ligament and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strong enough, then apply the plaster and ligament, leave it there for several days until it is healed; then remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If it happens that the joint is dislocated and its position is in movement, then administer humectants in baths and subtle friction, and compresses, until it is released; or place a greasy cloth over the joint, and leave it there on the bone for several days.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that, and put that in the bath; when you are done, then apply friction to the joint with tempered friction, and repeat over the greasy cloth, a ronhonal of movement, one, two, and three times.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	with a bath instrument, until it is softened.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place a wet and scorched cowhide over the joint, and strengthen it on that; do that several times, as that is moist and reduces it to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is at the joint that is between the arm and the shoulder.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Sometimes the shoulder is dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation is difficult, and the opposite is at other joints, but rather that it be done quickly in the reduction of it when it is dislocated, because the joint becomes inflamed or something happens to the inflammation.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation of it is that you place the joint of the shoulder of the patient on a table and the assistant extends the arm of that, and the doctor places his hand or his palm on the imminence of the joint, and pushes it into its own place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But rather that it be considered whether the palm is already stuck to the belly of the arm, then the patient places his back on the table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation has previously occurred, then the position of the arm of that inherently on the table, so that the hand of the doctor can be on that imminence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns soon, good; and if not, then gradually increase the strength of that ointment so that the abscess yields and leaves that place; and do not repeat that, because otherwise, it will not heal nor can you force its reduction before the days pass.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, if the joint is second to its tortuosity; and the patient does not know any cause, but the muscle is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you should know that the nerves are trapped or torn, and it is not engaged in the joint, but rather strengthened with a pointed cautery at the base of the joint and firmly apply that.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And when the pain returns, then pause on the ointment that we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for several days; and after that, it should be removed and left and the muscle of that place should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However, if the movement of that place is stopped and something heavy occurs in it, then gradually apply that ointment with some cold water and friction for a few days, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of the aforementioned dislocations.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes these dislocations occur at any part.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of these is dislocated at the side or on the abdomen, then place it in its position and push the dislocation back to its place, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the dislocated limb, and suspend the other devise on the part where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend the other and extend it until it is equal to its previous day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when the second day is not yet over, apply that second devise, and do not cease to slide it on that day and exercise movement with it; and apply that at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same thing if it is dislocated on the abdomen of the patient, and apply that to that part and do the first operation on it, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly, do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and many other vertebrae of those locations remain unaffected, then there is no cure for that, as death approaches the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And similarly, in such cases, the evacuation of the patient is forced by their will, and they cannot retain it; and many maneuvers are made to soften the muscles of that or the cushions of that or the arms of that or one of those; or if a vertebra of that location remains unaffected, then many maneuvers are made to remove it from four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, that is now removed from the back parts and is called a herniated disc.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The cure of that is that you should consider whether the herniated disc occurred in pregnancy, as in such cases there is no cure or healing for that.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In those cases where pain is felt through touch or percussion or by similar means, as the ancients called curative methods of speech, which most return to profit; moreover, I have also improved upon that one from which few are excused due to its proximity to the understanding and explanation, which I have exposed and formed with various instruments of that kind, showing it and explaining it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that in the case of a wound on the chest, there is neither healing nor cure of that kind; similarly, in the case of a wound made on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those are not cured except by the one that happens in the back properly, which I have recommended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be extended on their face on a soft surface as close to the wall as possible, and then extended with a wet cloth so that the chest of the patient does not stick.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then place a straight stick under the patient's back, with one end on the ground at the end of the bed around the head of the patient, and another stick in front of their feet on the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister should hold the wound, and not be still in the trench; and another minister should hold the other one in that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then wrap the bandage over the patient's head and leave the firm Leon tongue; extend the end of the bandage to the wound that should be on his head, and tie it there; and strengthen the other bandage over his ankles and under his knees, and hold his abdomen; and adjust all the bandages and tie them on the other wound which should be on his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Then the minister should extend the bandage to the part of the wound, and not remain still with both wounds and the bandages in the places where they were placed, but rather not be still as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor should place his hands on the patient's spine to strengthen it until he returns, or place them on a table, and adjust his feet on the table until he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if he does not return by this method, then take a table whose length or width is in the range of three arms, and dig in the wall where we said that it should be for the patient a place between the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the back of the table over the sacrum, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and then insert it when the sacrum is enclosed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open the other one that is rolled up on the mat; and you should be on your knees with the patient's head in the back of the two chairs, the length of which should be an arm, and the patient's head in the back of the other chair; and the distance between each chair should be a palm, and it is done in each chair through which the turn is made, and each one should be stopped on the ground so that it does not become crooked.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be another chair in which the turn is made, and it should be rolled up in the two spaces of the two chairs.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a space in which the chair is made, the length of which is a palm above that which is rolled up; and in the other two chairs there is a similar one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the straps that you have tied around the chest of the patient and the ones you have tied around their legs, and the straps that you have tied under their arms and the ones you have tied around their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each turn and have a minister hold the turn with their hand, and the doctor will massage the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then after the spine is returned and the area is massaged, apply an extract of honey on the bandage, and stop; and place a flat plate over the bandage, whose width should be about three digits or around those, and the length of it should be the amount that covers the area of the wound, and on the part of the spine where the pain is.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the strap that we have said, and use the patient as nourishment until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any inflammation in the area at the end of healing, then apply medicines that are moist and liniments for their administration on the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is already administered in that place, the plaster of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Sometimes accidents occur suddenly in the lower back, and this is due to that dislocation; and that bone which has already been about to dislocate for some time will not be able to be fixed with this medicine, because it will cause you to die immediately.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the hip joint and the muscle joint only experience dislocation, and not those accidents that occur in other joints due to their small removal and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The hip joint is dislocated in four ways, either at the back parts, or at the front parts, or at the inner parts, or at the outer parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	The hip joint is more often dislocated at the back parts, and less so at the inner or outer parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And when the dislocation of the hip occurs at the back parts, it is said that when you straighten the leg of the patient who is sick, the healthy leg is longer and the affected leg is shorter than the other, and the patient cannot bend their knee, and this is where the pus from an abscess forms, because the area of the thigh has already been reached.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The gentleman to whom the dislocation occurred at the parts forward, is that his accidents are opposite to this one.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The gentleman to whom the dislocation occurred at the parts backward, is that his back expands second complement, but not bend that one which is in the lower part, and if it goes to go and cannot be in those parts; and the urine of him is retained and his groin of him is abscess, and you must put the bandage of him over the thigh.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The gentleman to whom the dislocation occurred at the parts backward, is that his lower part does not expand, nor can he bend that one which doubles his groin, and the cushion of him is shorter than the other, and his groin is softened, and the head of the cushion must be put in that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	However, the reduction of these species of dislocation is that you consider, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already been reduced by that one who was near to you, then do so according to its arrangement, however, not entirely in that cure; and therefore, do not hope that it will be done immediately.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case of a recent dislocation, which is one of the four species of dislocations, you should apply heat to the joint and extend it to its parts behind and in front, and also to the right and left, where it will return strongly and not require other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this way, then prepare a strong minister and extend the cushion under the part that was left behind, or hold your hands over the area, or place a strip of cloth on the cushion above the patient's back; another minister should extend the hand of that one towards the patient's breasts; and then strongly hold a leather strap on the rim of the cushion, and another minister should clean the end of the strap.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if the extension is to the front or to the part behind the breastbone, or to the back part of the shoulder.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if the extension is to all those parts at once, then raise the patient's body from the ground and keep it hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This specific type of extension is especially common in all four cases.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns to that which we have mentioned, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary for all special cases to direct the appropriate cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own dislocation, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts inside, make sure that the patient lies on their left side; and place your hand on the back in that place where the head of the bed and the place which was left hang down; and extend the bandage from the angle of the bed to the furthest part of the ribcage.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another strong assistant grasps the patient's arms, and lifts the heavy side of the patient's bed, and extends to the parts of the body by forceful extension, so that it returns to its own place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This is the least painful cure for this member when it is reduced compared to other cases.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is excused from you and you do not obey the entrance of this special cure for all cases, make sure that both of the patient's feet are tied together with a strong bandage on both sides and below.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each should be equal to four fingers, and the patient's bed should be extended higher than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And the patient should be suspended over the top of the bed, and in the highest position; and the length of it from the ground should be equal to two arm lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong young man to traction the head of the cushion, and another young man should suspend it from the patient, and the other young man should pull the cushion with great force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the shoulder joint, place a cushion under the arm according to what we have recommended in the handbook; and strengthen the ligament over the patient's bed properly and on their chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And place two boards under their body, one under their feet, and the other under their head; and adjust the boards to the middle of the patient's chest above which they have wrapped warm clothes, so that the patient is not crushed by the board being between the patient's thighs, so that the extension to the parts behind is not pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each assistant extends his part, and the doctor guides his hand according to the art of reduction.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if the patient is overweight, it is quite difficult; otherwise, place your hand carefully and as we have said in the book for that purpose.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	However, make sure the patient does not move his legs too much.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation reaches its parts, then make sure that the cushion is extended more, and follow this method according to the book; and the doctor places the palm of his hand on the patient's groin, and another servant holds it with his other hand, and the one who extends it at the parts should pause at the part of the denol.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation reaches its parts from behind, then do not make the patient extend his legs, and raise him on the ground; having made sure that he is placed on a hard cause, as we have said about the position of the patient between two stools; and it is over his face and the limbs are extended, as we have said, without causing any harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it should be administered compression with an ointment on the location where the joint is affected.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is completed as follows — and the sign of the reduction of which is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both thighs of the patient, and when you see those equal and the patient extends one thigh and expands the other, then you know that the member according to which is returned — and then you adjust two cushions and press and extend the bent part so that the wide is not swollen in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then remove the bandage and press, and compare one cushion with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those equal in the right way, then you know that the dislocation has been stopped, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of softening, then you return and press that, and extend it according to your first structure, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then remove that one, and make him wait in an ambulatory over which you have placed a bed, until he is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32:
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	About the treatment of dislocation of the thumb.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The thumb is dislocated in three ways: when it is dislocated forward, backward, and to the side; but it is not dislocated downwards.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of thumb dislocation is that you command the patient to place his cushion on the side; then you will know that the thumb is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all three ways of thumb dislocation is that you make the patient lie down straight, unless he can already extend his own arm; then place your hand on his face, and hold his foot between your palms; and then make him hold his thumb against your palms, and bring those fingers together over his thumb for strength, and another servant extends his leg until the thumb returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	When lifting the patient, ensure that their cushion adheres to the surface that is not laborious.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply the plaster to that and make the cushion stick to the surface, and leave it there for three or four days, and then remove it.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not use the patient for walking for several days, until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	However, if the reduction of the patient to you is excused, then in the meantime administer strong extension to the membranes of which in the cure of the hand previous narrative.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Sometimes the ankle is dislocated by slight removal, and sometimes it is dislocated after some time, and the dislocation of it is made at the parts within or at the parts without.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the way to deal with the dislocation of it is that sometimes the ankle inflates and proceeds to the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	If the cure of removing it is of great difficulty, and it should be extended with ease to the hands and should be equalized within a short time when it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In the cure of it when it is dislocated secondly, let him do a proper examination of the patient, and have a strong and skilled assistant behind the back of that one in the middle position of him.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you should place your left hand on the most appropriate part of the foot, and your right hand on the part behind the knee in the position of the hollow.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards your right hand, and place your left hand on both sides of the calf, and extend your left hand; and push the foot against the right side of the thigh three times.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Do that twice after you have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the foot against the left thigh the third time, and you are at the hollow.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore if it returns in one or two times this way, and if you see the foot equalized, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on him, until he returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If it is forbidden for you to reduce the hernia with the method we have recommended, then place the patient on their back on the ground, and firmly hold a pillow under their back, and place a box between their thighs, and you have already covered them with a cloth so that they do not get cold.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And the assistant should hold the patient's limbs, and another assistant should extend their leg or the bandage that is tied around the ankle; and each assistant should extend against the extension of their own side, and the pillow should be extended between the patient's thighs to retain it so that the hernia does not fall to the sides beyond its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor should equalize the dislocation with their hands, and another assistant should hold the healthy limb at the sides, where the dislocation returns to its ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and you declare the patient's health from the reduction of the hernia, then apply a poultice firmly to that area, and tie the leg to the bed.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And if you fear or guard the nerves that are behind the heel, because the bandage over it should not be too tight and it will cause great pain.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it for two days or three; if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then remove it on the third day or fourth, and prevent the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to walk during that time, do not do so until the dislocation is dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not require treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if the abscess bursts, then cover it with the same ointment that we mentioned in our previous story, in another place for treatment and to prevent infection until it is completely healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter thirty-four.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the cure of the aforementioned dislocations of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	And if the one that is dislocated has a similar extension of his toes; and that which is not difficult, in front of the longer.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in the acromion process of the shoulder, then have the patient lie on their back, either on the ground or on a table, and remain there as if they were lying down.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then, standing by the patient's foot, place your hand over the area where the joints are, and gently press on that spot until you feel it return to its original position and does not appear in the prominent location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then, place your hand under the patient's belly on a table that supports the entire body, with two cushions, and strengthen that support in a decent and firm manner for three days; and then remove it and let it rest for several days, until it is strong and assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the special types of dislocation that are caused by injury or fracture or any other means.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those causes occurs and you perform the treatment and restoration of that, many times death follows.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And to avoid presuming on the cure of that person, but rather what is known in the art, of long use, mercy and pity, late, not ardent or presumptuous; and that he uses in the beginning of medicines that yield apostems cautiously, and leave the sick man to divine judgment, unless to that one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, for relief from misery, and in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then you should strive to make that person as soon as possible, in the beginning of the cause, giving that it might engender an apostem cautiously.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns after you wish, then administer a regimen that yields an apostem cautiously and heals the sore, and give it what is suitable for it from decoctions of drying herbs.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the bones that are separated, then you should perforate their surface, and do so as we have said in the simple diseases of that which was previously mentioned in those places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid the second of that tool in the ways of fear according to what my previous preaching preceded you; for that is better for you to your own Creator, and more enduring to your glory, and more salutations to your own way as those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	May the words of Albucasis be perfectly understood, for which God may not be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
