Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the language of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh sons, if you have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, because of its completion, and because of its explanations, and because of its declarations, I see that you have completed this work that is part of surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The operation of amputation has been completely forgotten in our region and time, until the science of it was discovered, and its proof is now established; and no one knows about it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been destroyed and led to many errors and uncertainties until the understanding of it was closed and its length was extended.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I see that you should live by this order of this treatise in the second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work as well as for addition to the declaration, and for its preparation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	When the cause for which one is not immediately skilled in anatomy in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and that it requires one to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which was recently rediscovered by Gualia before she knew the junctures of the members and their forms, and their conjunctions and separations; and also knowing the bones, nerves, and ligaments, their number, and their size; and also the pulsating veins, quiet veins, and the locations of their exits.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	For which reason Hippocrates says that a name is not necessary, but in the work itself, and especially in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already mentioned him in the introduction of this book; because those who do not know what we have said about anatomy will not be able to avoid errors by which many men have died, as I have seen too many of them, because they are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	When a doctor saw a woman who had been infected with an abscess of the neck, and had incised some arteries in the neck so that a great deal of blood flowed into her, causing her to die between the hands of her companions.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And another doctor saw that the dragon had swallowed a stone from a man who had died and had processed it in his state, and the stone was very large, and came to him and passed it through a small intestine, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And he had already called for a tool to extract it, and saw that because of the size of the stone and the position of the patient, he knew that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And another doctor took the wages of a duke of our land for surgery, and went to a skilled blacksmith who was also injured; and because of his ignorance, he extracted the fracture, above the wound, with pliers and strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then remove the dressing according to his desires, and remove the bandage, and remove the bandage for several days and command that it be removed; and if the wound and foot become infected, and reach a critical stage.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and I removed the bandage, and he felt relief and no more pain from his wounds.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the decay was already confirmed in the limb, so it could not be stopped and it continued to spread the decay in the limb until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who punctured a carbuncle, and it became ulcerated after several days, until the wound was completely healed.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason is that the wound is purged of melancholic humor, and it does not happen that it reaches the bone in one limb, but rather that the entire limb that suffers should be kept.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	Therefore, my children, it is necessary for you to perform the operation in two steps: one in which the limb is associated with health, and another in which the work is done in the best possible conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already existed in this place where the operation is performed, which is an error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against that and lay hands on him, so that the people do not approach to speak to you and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And take up your weapons with solicitude and protection of God, and your patients with facility and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God for the salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay hands on those terrible patients of difficult healing, and hold your weapons against that which makes you fear, so that your patience in your faith and in your name does not escape you: because more remains to your glory, and less in the world and after in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	In some cases, it is necessary to dissect:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat a bad patient, because evil doctors are not recognized.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already devised this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begins the division of the free, and first of the first section.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered for the entry of the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the handles of the cautery, and of what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The second section division.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and perforation, and on vents, and on plasters, and on the extraction of sharp objects and similar ones, all chapter and ordered from the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The third section division.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and on dislocation, and on the cure of torsion and similar ones; chapter ordered for the entry of the foot, and from the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of pointed cautery and of sharp medicine and remembrance of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that begins the treatise on all the foot.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	That you say the quality of those tips of that cautery and of its handles, and in what condition it is prohibited to use the cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, it is said that the speech about the quality of the cauterizing needle and its handle is long and elaborate, subtle for those who know, and secretly hidden; and from there, many people have spoken about it, and they have disagreed, and I will give you a small part of their speeches, fearing prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore it is said that the cauterizing needle corresponds to the whole complexion universally, which is good material or its materials, except for two complexions, which are tail complexions of six materials.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the tail complexion and dry material, they disagree; because some said that the cauterizing needle is suitable for that, and the others said the opposite of that, which is not convenient in illness that is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient for illness to have that which is caut and dry be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And they said that those who said the opposite of that, which is suitable for cauterizing in all illness of tail complexion and dry material that exists in the bodies of men, because when you compare the bodies of men and their humidity to the complexion of fire, you often find the bodies of men wet.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I hear by the word of that one, who has experimented this himself several times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But may not come upon that one who has already been extracted and exercised in the capital of cauterization by previous exercise, and has known the diversity of the composition of men and the disposition of their maladies in their members, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time for those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	May not come upon you in other compositions, and especially in moist and humid maladies, for all doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree in the use of cauterization in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that the secret of cure by cauterization with fire and its goodness is above cauterization with medicine, because fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member that is cauterized and does not affect the other member without a slight harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the action of medicine burn reach that in the members which has already been there, and often it brings in the member with the disease of difficult cure and often it causes harm.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	During the day, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, it does not cause anything but excess. And we already know this from experience and the length of service in the study of the art over the truth of the causes; and for this reason I am excused from the length of the speech. And if it were not for the fact that it is not read aloud in this place, it would be hidden from you in secret, and the quality of its operation in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels diseases, according to the philosophical demonstrative discourse, would be sharpened in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Know, children, that they should not forget the time when it is most appropriate to perform cauterization and place the best time in the morning.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harm from the time accident is submerged in the joy of which the cauterization is thrown, and especially if the cauterization is for pain or necessary painful ones, forcefully and quickly, the ones that do not suffer delay because they fear the evil that comes from those who are malicious, which is greater than small harm entering through the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And do not catch in your feet, or, sons, that is not considered by the general public and foolish doctors, because that malady which is cured by cauterization is not always effective, and they stop that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as it is said above, because cauterization is not only in a place of medicine that alters the appearance and dries out the moisture which are the cause of the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, cauterization is used excessively in medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his malady returns at some time in the future, according to the appearance of the patient and the location of his malady, and its virtue, and that which is prepared in his body from the aggregation of excess in him, and that which is obtained by him in his acquisition in foods and similar causes; but the malady in which cauterization is administered is a subtle malady in a member of few excesses and moisture, as with the cautery of teeth for pain and similar to that, it is possible that in it does not return that pain, but that which is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And according to common speech, cautery is the last remedy in medicine, and it is true that I do not understand what they mean by that, because they believe that there is no cure that can be achieved with medicine or any other cause before using cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is in contrast to that; and they understand that cautery is the last remedy in medicine only when administering methods of treatment in some diseases, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause they administer such cautery, and it is effective for that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here it is understood that cautery is the last remedy in medicine, not as they understand it, which I understand from common speech and from the opinions of many doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that gold cautery is better than iron cautery, and they did not say that only because of the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the location of cauterization does not matter, since it is not absolutely true, because I already have some that are good and some that are bad, and cauterization with that is better than iron cautery, but however when you do cauterization with fire of gold, it is not your decision, since it is made according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive the heat; and if you place it over the fire, the gold melts in the fire, and some pieces are left for the artisan to use for that purpose.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for that reason, a pointed cautery of iron is made, which should be lighter and more directly in line with the operation's direction.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on the cautery in the second chapters, and I have ordered those who are between the feet, so that they may ask him what he wants for himself.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of the cautery for head pain caused by coldness and dampness.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization is caused by moisture and coldness, which are the main causes of various accidents, called corrosion, from the head to the parts of the limbs and the joints, and many sleep problems, and tooth and jaw pain, and generally all kinds of illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, suddenness, and apoplexy, and similarities in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, command the patient to take a laxative medicine to cleanse his head for three or four nights, according to the patient's age and custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command the one who shaves his own head to do so between your hands on a chair and place your hands over his chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the blade of your palm against the nose between his fingers.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, if the location you mentioned is reached, mark that spot and then use the pointed cautery made of olive oil in this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that on the spot you marked and apply it in a way that drips down, so that the one who is being treated does not feel it being applied gradually, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then slightly raise your hand and look at the spot, and if you see that some of the bone has been exposed, as much as a handful of grains, then raise your hand, and if it does not return, bring your hand back to that iron, or another of those, if it is cold, before it is seen from the bone what I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small piece of salt and dissolve it on the spot and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your hand on the flat part of the shoulder and hold that one over the entrance where the shield of the fire is to be destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the four-drug ointment into the location until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that as long as the plague is open, the more the arm is stretched out, the better and more beneficial it is.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say that the tail should be cauterized inside the bone, and it should be held with the cauterizer until some part of the bone is attached.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then wipe away that which is attached to the bone, and then heal it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they say that others prefer the cauterizer to reach the back, until it reaches the strong part of the bone before it breaks, and this is the way to make a small puncture:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate that from that location, the vapors of the head are released.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then healed before it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	It is not clear to me whether these two types of cautery are used in all men, but rather on the second type due to fear; and if that one is better for health when it is used, as the head is revealed by the solution of continuity of which there is evidence in other members, and more so when the head of the patient is naturally free.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first type of cautery is safer and better for me; and from that one, and the other work is also beneficial for health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the head cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the head, chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the patient, and it is prolonged, and it uses herbs and worms and capipurges and plasters and ointments and galls and cadels and gualinas and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that they have and do not use again for any of those causes, then consider that the head of the patient is naturally very strong; and it is not free and often a great burden, then that cauterizer uses another cautery instead of that one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then, approach with the pointed cautery on the surface of his head to cauterize where the vein is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the vein and expose it from the bone as much as we have found, and cauterize that with a cautery in the location behind the head where they place the pad - and that is the location where the pad is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And let your hand remain still, and do not expose the bone, because the patient will experience great pain different from all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will direct you to this location, because that cautery is the one that cauterizes the veins of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cauterization than that which cauterizes the middle location of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the cauterization of the old non-antique.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain is felt in the part of the head or extends into the neck, remove medicines that relieve the headache, and administer the other cure, which I have mentioned in the rules for illnesses; and if all this does not help, then cauterization in that location is done in two ways: either with a sharp cautery or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May the pointed cautery be used as a medical instrument to remove a splinter from an arm, and then clean that area and apply ointment to its extremities with cotton.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then make an incision in the location of the pain on the temple with a blade that is thin enough to reach the correct location without being visible.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then apply a strong bandage to the wound to prevent further constriction, and leave it for three hours; then remove the bandage, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then apply a poultice over the affected area where the wound is located.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then care for that area until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do that with some medical instruments that I have written about in the other treatise on medical instruments.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cauterization be done in this way: light the cautery with this method:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a "claw-like" cautery, where the head of it has the form of a clover with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small notch.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand on the location of the pain, and remove it – so that the wound is not stuck with the scab that has been left – and turn the small iron at speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of it that is stuck by the length of the needle is such that it covers the entire area, and lift your hand to prevent the artery from being stuck with the scab that has been left, so that no blood flow occurs.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a poultice of salt water on that location, and leave it for three days; and then apply a moist poultice around it, and then treat with an ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cauterize the tip of the lancet according to the cautery, and be careful not to cut the artery in this area properly.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cauterization of the ancient emigration area.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat the emigration area with the cure we have mentioned in the previous chapter, and with the cure we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and if you do not find the cure, and if you see that the disease does not respond to the first cauterization of medicine or the cauterization of fire, then be careful to ignite the lancet within it until it is completely burned, so that it covers the location of the pain with a long line that covers the entire area, or that one; and place your hand firmly inside it as you pierce the scab and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is bruised from chewing, and that the jaw not be stuck and the nerves that cause it, and that it does not become spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and care of the flow of sand from the artery that is abscessed, which in the abscission of it there is fear, and more so for those who do not know what it is and are not studious or careful; and leave the operation in its beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find the remembrance of the regimen for the flow of sand accidents from the artery according to its method, in its own place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this disease that does not abate with this cautery and the patient's condition becomes tolerable, cauterize that in the middle of the head where we have reported, and cure the wound before it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter of stretching of the artery with two points, and this is the best cauterization and more conformable.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cautery for the pain of gout.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the big toe is caused by friction and is cured by laxative causes and the other cure as mentioned in the division, and the pain does not return, then apply the cautery, and this is the one that has no point, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then apply the point to the cautery, and it should be moved around the entire big toe as if it were rotated, or in the circuit of each one if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along with the cautery, carefully apply it to the tip of the big toe, as if you were testing the location.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery for that point in the entire big toe, and it is not, and then cure the locations before they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of the cautery for torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture that is cured and is not healed by any other cautery except the ones that come from flexion, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery of the specific part that is affected by dryness or spasm of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that part of torture that is caused by jealousy and capriciousness and guards, and you do not compare your treatment, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first at the edge of the ear, the second a little below it, and the third at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected part, as softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that part with the cautery at the right edge of the ear, a little above it on the top of the head, and in the temple another, as long as the second part, and place your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the main part of the codeine is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is special for the cutters, the shape of which is given in the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	May be, however, it is more subtle to have one fewer than that; and cover with a cloth in the place of excessive filthiness, one.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then care for the place with what is given as the process until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the ancient cauterization of apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and is treated with what we have said and does not compare your medicine and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: over all the corners of his head; and with the cauterie and the middle part of the head, as we have said; and with the cauterie in the back.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cauterie is done as it is said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and more back; and then care for the place with what processes.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of the cauterization of forgetfulness caused by a blow.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Give the patient large amounts of grease and the servant's hand to rub it in.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then wipe the entire head of the patient and place your hand over their eyes, using the ointment described in the treatise on ointments.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Place some cotton wool on that, which is a handle for the cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Do this second, as you have already described.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if that does not heal well; then make three points in the back part of their head, which should be placed in the part of the head closest to the neck, entering from the part farthest from the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Place the largest amount of the ointment between each point, and then care for the cautery with what is proceeding.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you are adding more and the patient can bear it, then make the point in the middle location; and if you are adding too much, then cauterize that over both toes.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then care for it until it is healed; and the cautery should be made according to the form given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cautery for varicose veins and of softening the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	That you proceed as in the softening of the head and that you have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then apply that cautery in the middle of the head, and apply the cautery over all the joints of the head, and apply it over the back part of it, and three cauteries over the spines of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the patient's illness of softening the body of too many and the patients are suffering greatly, then apply that cautery with four cauteries over the spines of the back, and afterwards apply it inside where the sound of the neck of the patient comes from, and raise the tieua hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then care for that until it is healed, and this cautery should be olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized but that epilepsy is by reflex.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, when the patient first begins to have symptoms and the other cure has been mentioned in the previous division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the patient is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer garlic and mustard to the one who is modifying, giving it for several days, good digestion of the foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that with a cautery at the middle of the back of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery at the back of the head, and over each hair on the head, cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize that with cautery as I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body over the spine of the neck and the spine of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use olive oil as it has been prescribed.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then pause the fine cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and become thin and pale, then cauterize those parts with the cauteries that we have mentioned in the place where they have paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and declines to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him that which purifies his brain according to the same which has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, and make a tortoise-like incision well on his scalp, and place a cushion in the middle of his head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be lying down, and held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then place a liniment; and it is worthy of an ancient sheep's belly.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And scald that over the fire for heating, which is measured to suit him, the same which he has suffered when it is most in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then apply that in the middle of his head on his scalp, and let it be softened before it is scattered.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And give the patient this medicine every week for the entire week, along with other treatment until they are healed; or if you want, make small points with a pointed cautery according to the most affected area, but always hold the hand with a sterile glove: this is a special cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And place your hand on that swollen area, either in a position of rest or in grayish-white spots.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of the descent of water in the belly.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you are told that the beginning of water in the belly is indicated by symptoms that I mentioned in the division, then start and give the patient a drink that will cause them to vomit, and keep that one from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that person sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command that person to raise their head, and make points with a pointed cautery in the middle of the head; and if it is the beginning of water in two bellies, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one belly, then make points with two cauteries on two temples.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incise all the veins and tendons that are behind the knee; and place the cautery in that long area on the side of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow from there, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you should have knowledge of the skill in extracting tendons and making incisions in those areas, and cauterizing blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some tendons are cauterized behind two bones and two cautery instruments produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When ancient tears from the eyes are persistent and through the veins and arteries that are in the area manifestly before the cap and it is verified that this is an excessive fluid, then cauterize that with the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water accumulations in the eyes, and with the cautery in the middle of the cap and with two cautery instruments in the neck behind two temples, and with two cautery instruments in the neck behind two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if it is necessary to make an incision, then cauterize that part of the flank on the outer side of the temple with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization of bad breath.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that person who has been mentioned in the division and have not yet advanced your treatment, first prepare and give to the patient three nuts; then remove their head, and cauterize with a small cautery or an olive oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that part of the flank with two cauteries on the two temples, just under the hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that one.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the shape of the cautery of cloves.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cauterization for the softening of the eyelids.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery like this one; and this is its shape:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you, with a small pointed cautery, make points on the two upper eyelids in every part, and they lengthen from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the eyelid.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press your hand too much against the cautery, but according to the amount that the sticky part of the eyelid is attached.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	About the cautery of the eyelid when the hairs become converted into the parts and prick the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eyelid become converted into the parts and prick the eye, cautery is made in those places in two ways: either by burning or by medical means.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If cautery is made by fire, command the patient to lie down with his eyes closed, while those who remove his hairs are present, and they are prolonged and equalized; and if he pricks himself in that place, then strengthen the eyelids of that eye with a bandage so that it is not injured until the hairs have grown.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When they are born and grow up, then pause the head of the patient on your thigh, and place your hand over their eyelid, using a secondhand tent, which should be according to the shape of a flea's back, and close to their ears.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place a warm compress on the eyelid in albumen of egg or in mucilage of pulli over their eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then use the cautery that has this shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize the shape that was placed, little by little, in turns, until the surface of the eyelid is burned, which should be like a flea's back, entirely.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And to prevent infection of the work, you should close the eyelid already, and raise the eyelids of the patient, and the points of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave that for three days, and then place it over the compress until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then carefully cure that wound until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if it returns through the eyelids due to some cause, and the eyelid becomes softened, then do another point with the cautery on that spot as you had done previously.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the eyelids are in the eyelid, then cautery that spot where it is lifted to its natural place and equalized, so that the eyelids do not pinch it.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But if the cautery does not burn this, then command the patient to lift the eyelids while they are being stretched and equalized, and then make a shape of paper or cloth like a spoon.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take some fresh, warm honey and mix it with those causes, and make it into a poultice so that it is not scattered; and then spread that poultice on the paper or cloth that is made like a spoon, and place it on one of the eyelids; and place the other eyelid on a soft cloth in albumen of egg, and let the head of the patient be in the upright position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And press the medicine on the wound and make sure that the patient does not bite the medicine until they feel the burning sensation of the medicine, which is like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so, when the patient persistently bites the medicine, remove the medicine and say to them, "when the burning sensation stops, then put the medicine back on the wound and wash it with clean water; and then consider whether the eyelid has been lifted as it was during the surgery, because it is good; and if not, return the medicine to the place where it did not stick and did not become discolored before the operation is completed and is closed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then press on the wound with your finger until the pus of the infection is removed, and then cure it with a poultice of vinegar or another remedy until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to keep close watch during the operation that the medicine does not fall out of the wound, and if the eyelid becomes soft after some days and there is any cause for the hairs in the wound, then repeat the medicine on the place where the eyelid becomes soft, as it was done at the beginning, and remove it when it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the mirror.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the bones of men are differentiated according to their size and shape, and therefore your contraction is made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the right way to that one who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal bone of the jaw.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula of this kind, do not confuse your treatment, but rather cauterize it in this way: order the patient to place their head on your knee, and hold their head between your hands in such a way that it is neither too close nor too agitated.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a piece of cloth soaked in alcohol or in mucilage of poppy on the bone of their jaw.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be concave, like the form of a cane or a pen of the Voltors, at one end of which is made the cautery.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you see, enter deeply into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to come out, use the tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But those who are concave are better suited for the work of the tieua.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is opened, and drain the pus from it and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place your hand over the area where the cautery is burning, and hold the tieua's hand or the patient's hand with a small force to prevent your hand or the patient from being burned, and then remove the cautery from the gray matter of the skin and corrupt that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if the beginning of the tieua cautery penetrates into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and leave that for three days, and then place your hand on that side to protect and surround it with an external drying agent until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If they have passed several days without healing, then pause the acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and then rub it according to what is suitable in its own chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterizing the fistula that was first described as follows: go to the location of the fistula and make a hole in it, then place a small amount of lead in it; and hold your hand over it with good retention, so that the lead does not reach the bottom of the fistula; and cover the surface of the fistula with album of honey or water, where the lead sticks to the location of the fistula and heals it for wonderful healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a nasal spray and reduce the fistula to the nose's own location when it comes back to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of the wound in the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Herpes occurs in the lips, and more frequently in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you cure those fissures with the remedy that we have mentioned in divisions and do not expand your cure, then use the small cautery as follows:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And place it according to the thickness of the spoon.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place your finger carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the edge of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with wax until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of fistulas in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the uvula or on the palate or on the edges of the teeth, an abscess occurs and a pimple forms, and it breaks, and it becomes old, and blood flows and a fistula is formed, and you cure it without expanding your cure, then use the cautery according to the amount that has been received in the fistula, and place that ignited cautery in the mouth of the fistula, and your hand inside until the hot iron reaches the edge of it, and on the other side make a pimple or two; and then cure it with the remedy that we have mentioned for the cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	If the wound is healed and cured, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and treat the infected bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the extraction of teeth and the softening of jaws.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the jaws are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, treat them with those medicines and do not confuse them, then place your hand on the patient's head and hold the cautery in the shape that will come up, without letting go of the tongs over the tooth and inserting it into that space, heating it quickly, so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the same time as the tooth is loosened.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient opens their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and you can stop that, because when the tooth is loose and the jaw is softened and the moisture corrupted is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cauterization of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or if there is ice or worms in it, and medicine does not cure it, then cauterization is performed in two ways: with a cautery made of cow's horn, or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The cautery made of cow's horn is that you take the horn and blow it until it becomes hot, then take a needle and wrap it in cloth, and place it on the tip of the tent, and quickly insert the heated cautery into the tooth that hurts.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat this several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, soak some wool or cloth in the horn below, and place it on the tooth that hurts, and place another over that iron as it ignites until the iron reaches the front of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But the cauterization with fire is that you wait for the moment when the ember or iron is in its place, and if there is some smoke or the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then approach the cautery in the shape that will come, and place that on the tooth and your hand inside as the cautery is being heated; and do some maneuvers so that the pain remains or on that day or on the other day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And so that the patient does not bite their own tongue and holds it for an hour, and then remove it; this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize the part that you wish to extend according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cauterization of protrusions.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When protrusions are caused by swelling and humors that are not obedient to digestion by medicines and you wish to digest them slightly, then approach the cautery with the shape that is this following, having two extremities prepared so that the smoke from the cautery can escape through the other extremity, and place that ignited on that abscess a maneuver, and another if necessary of that, until it reaches the top of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then pause the cautery according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it for three days and place it on the side in an ointment between when it has been completely burned by the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that wound with bandages and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the cannula or pointed cautery in such cases is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of warts on the feet and on their contraction.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the moisture comes over the throat of the lung, and especially when it is caused by coldness of the body, then make sure that the patient is evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that part of the gullet in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to reach the cautery to the gullet or burn the windpipe of the patient, but a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that part with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the lower vertebrae of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the pointed cautery should be used in the same way as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that part which was previously inserted until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	About the cauterization of a sick person's lung and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, the patient does not have fever or tonicity, and it is an old illness, then cauterize that part with two pointed cauteries on the sternum in the places where the ribs meet each other; and another cauteri in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and use the pointed cautery as before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, your cauterization should be made with the pointed cauteri called puncta, whose form is described in the punctacio of lumbago.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let the points enter into those places; and then care for that part which was previously inserted until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the pointed cautery has three parts for this cauterization: you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cauterization of the nipple, which is a helpful remedy.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the remedy is dislocated due to slippery humors and not stopped at its return time, it must be returned before it returns to that place, and with a slight movement, it can be moved as we have testified, so first reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient over on their back or on their side; and raise the cloth which is in the part of the nipple to the parts above the ones mentioned in your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the parts below.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then light the cautery, which has two ends; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the cloth until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come from four ends of the cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply it according to the amount of pressure; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Some of these methods are adjusted according to this count and because they are the cautery. viii.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place salt on the cautery and make the patient comfortable, and do not allow any part of the body to be in pain for a while until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the parts above and below, then make that, and then cauterize over the muscle with a clavilh or pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	About the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is moisture and excess humidity in the stomach that is not part of its composition and multiplies inside, and if you continue with the methods of treatment and do not confirm it, then it is likely that the patient will be on their back, and extend your hands and your things, and then cauterize that with three cautery: one cautery under the chest per the quantity of a pointed cautery, and two cautery under the ribs of the cautery, until the figure of cautery triangular; and lengthen between those that are not adjusted that will cause harm.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the thickness of the two fingers of the pig's tail.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if the shape of the cautery is in this form, then it is added. And if you want to, burn with a large cautery at the middle part of the stomach in this form; and this is a cautery in the form of a circle in this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach is burned at the point where this cautery frightens it: and you should put your hand over the stomach puncture according to the quantity that you want to test, and then burn with a cautery at the points; and then cure with the remedy that is preceded before it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the burning of the foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the foot is painful due to cold or humidity or thick air before its normal composition is disrupted by excessive exit, and the patient is cured with the remedy that we have said and not compared, then it is necessary that the patient be lying on their back, and then test three burns in this form and this quantity on the foot behind the ribs, which is the position of a man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery should be according to the greatest length of the aforementioned, and the cautery should be according to the length of the body stretched out.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not understand the meaning of the word "cauteri" in this context.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of water that is attached to the thickness of the flesh of the codex is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet, then they should be seated, which has already extended its limbs and raised its arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to use these cauteries as pointed cautery, when you have skill and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overdo the cauterization, and let the thickness of the whole codex be attached so that the entire body is attached and reaches inside the intestines, as this codex is delicate; and you should know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of puncturing abscess of the thigh with a pointed cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When the inflammation or abscess in the thigh is ended and you want to know if that abscess is in the meat of the thigh or in its tunic, then if it is in the meat of the thigh, the patient's weight and pain are increased.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the thigh, then the pain is greatly increased and often fatigues the doctors with its cure.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, let the patient lie on their side; and then examine the location of the abscess; and then ignite the cautery that is shaped like a needle, the form of which has been described in the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize it with that and ignite the cautery until all the cord is carbonized, until it reaches the bone, until it escapes into the sinus.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that by the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cauterization except that which is prolonged in the art of medicine and in which most patients have known good results; but this one has been tried for some time on this operation, however it leaves to us a better result.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cautery for foot pain.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauteries of the feet according to astrology were done in this manner, and this is what you should take from the longest dry reed that can be found, and it should be as thick as possible.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that one in oil and place it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at that location which is between the connection of the scapula and the collar; and two small cauteries behind, one declining slightly to the part where the beard is left, and two small cauteries in that location which decline between the fifth rib and the spine, declining slightly to the back parts; and another cautery in the middle of the chest; and three cauteries on the back parts; and another cautery in that location which is between the two scapulae, and two cauteries on the sides of the chest, behind the one that is between the two scapulae.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover your hand with the pointed cautery, but rather in the open palm of your work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And it has been said by ancient authors that those who use pointed cautery of iron similar to rays and ignite them, then place them in the location between the ribs, until they reach the apostema and remove the bad blood, just as we have said in the apostema of the throat.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this puncture, the pointed cautery does not cause fear, because it often happens in the location of the fistula that is not healed.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the mouth.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the patient's mouth, do not compare your treatment with what we have said in the division, but rather cauterize it in three ways, all of which are corrective, one of which is to make three or four cautery strokes along the length of the mouth according to the figure of the cautery of the throat, whose figure has been given.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And each cautery should have the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the handle of the cautery should be the handle that we said in the cautery of the foot equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not place your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery with two flames, which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the cord that is at the end of the bed where the patient's left side is.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be the one that lifts the cord according to the length of the body, so that the points are made at the appropriate latitude.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert both flames, light one, in the moment that those penetrate the cord of the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus four points are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with the cautery having three flames.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you should cure the pointed cautery so that it does not cause the arm to swell for too many days, which is more harmful than the other causes of treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cautery for hydrophobia.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	A pointed cautery should not be used in hydrophobia, but rather a specific one.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydrophobic patient, follow the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment, but rather place four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the throat, and another cautery on the chest, and two cauteries between the ribs of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the chest, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be determined by the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cauterization in place so that the arm does not swell for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from the healing area too soon, as they need to be accompanied by those who understand their condition, and their recovery should be monitored closely.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery that is used to cauterize the abdomen should be similar to that described above, and the one used for cauterizing the back should be according to its own shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter thirty-two.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cauterization of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with water and filled with hydrostatics, cautiously cauterize the feet over the back of the foot, in the area between the ear and the ring, and elevate your hand above the cauterizer and do not turn it; then elevate your hand and do not return to that position until the hydrostatics have subsided.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be shaped like this: And then make two cautery needles on each thigh, and in each thigh, make a cautery needle at the end of the cautery blade.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be as long as the cushion: and place the other end of the cautery underneath, and the other at the lower part of the cushion; and above each cushion, two cautery points.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time so that some water can drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of cautery for belly ulcers.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When belly ulcers are caused by cold and humidity entering the intestines, which is the digestive and retentive power in the stomach and intestines, and is treated with the methods of cure and not with incisions, and sometimes the patient suffers from a strong cautery, then apply a large cautery on their stomach according to what was previously mentioned in the cautery of the stomach, and also apply the circular cautery and four cautery points around the abdomen, and the clavilh cautery; and also apply a cautery on the alcatin over alozis large, or two cautery points.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If you see the excessive moisture and the patient is tolerating it, then burn that above the perineum and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries above the stomach and near the groin, which cures the condition greatly without error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34:
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in their natural state of ancient hemorrhoids or if they are caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are cured with the method we have mentioned in the division and do not differ from the true cure, then burn with three cauteries above the small and small triangular sacrum, and with a cauterized needle puncturing the abdomen twice.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it is determined that the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is swollen, then burn that above the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; and with one cauterized needle puncturing the side, and with another cauterized needle puncturing the soft part of the patient's abdomen, and leave the cauterized needle in place for some time, and cure the patient before they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cauterization of the thighs near their abscissions.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the thighs, then you ignite the cautery that is shaped like a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then place that ignited in the removed thigh, and finally insert the mouth through which the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the pus comes out.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make one or two wounds, if the wounds are too large, then cauterize each of them after you have removed them, and then care for those that you apply to them from the ointment until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on anything, it is better to use a smaller one.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of cauterization of fistulas that are formed in nature between the parts of it.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not comply with the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by that, then heal it with cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When someone has an abscess in the natural gluteal region, and it is old and infected, remove the pus and corrupted humors from it, and then apply a subtle probe to the depth of the abscess, and then determine the amount of its depth.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then use a cautery that resembles a needle.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that lit cautery into this abscess, according to the amount in which the probe enters.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat this process with the cautery every few days or three, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the abscess goes to the bladder or intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not do that unless the abscess is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the wound until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the wound is sealed, and all the matter has been removed from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then you will know that it has healed completely.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matters are not staying in their place, then know that they are penetrating into the bone and corrupting it, or that is one of those causes from which they will remember and return to that location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of the hernias.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain occurs in the hernias due to friction or excessive wind, and when the patient's breath is obstructed, then apply a pointed cautery on each hernia, using a claw-like instrument to hold it in place.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And if the cauterization is too strong, then delay it by a small amount, so that three lines of cauterization can be applied, and they will be more effective in reducing pain.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes weak and soft due to friction or moisture, and the patient cannot hold their urine, then apply a pointed cautery on the lower part of the bladder, using a pen-like instrument to hold it in place. Also, use another pointed cautery on the right side and another on the left side of the bladder.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the foot; and cauterize that pointed cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cautery if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the nails should be clipped according to what is appropriate.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cauterization of the mouth.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is a wound and moisture in the mouth, and it is forbidden to press it, and the tissues of the mouth are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and there are pains due to their presence, then it is recommended that this location be cauterized with three cautery in the circumference of the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a pointed cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cautery, and let the cautery be clipped.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When the moisture of the soft tissues is infiltrated into the part of the elbow, and they are causes of the inflammation of its location, and it is recommended that the cushion be prolonged over the other when they are compared to each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the dislocation is often in the shoulder joint.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then cut the patient's clothing at the same part of the body as the incision is being made, in order that you may have a clear view of the area around the incision as it is being turned over, and so that the incision will fall in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery should be in the shape of the one used for stomach surgery.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not available to you, then use three pointed cauteries or an olive branch.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the cautery should be made according to the thickness of the entire skin; and then care for that which has been healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain is felt in the part of the body, and its cause is cold and moisture, the patient is cured by the method we have mentioned, and this method is ancient, so that you may remove the patient from heavy humors such as bad-smelling or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the handle of the cautery in that case has two types: a medical cautery with a burning flame, or a fire cautery.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Second, there are two types of cauteries known, one of which cauterizes that over the part of the ankle of the patient with three triangular cautery in this form; and do those well deep.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery is the thickness of the skin and if the cautery is made of olive oil or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes several wounds are made on the neck over the head of the ankle so that there are four cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cautery with the circle of which the form is preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, it and that the circle contains and burns the entire skin.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way of cautery in case when pain is adherent to the ankle and does not extend into the space.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it extends into the space, then cauterize that over the space on the location where the patient is located; and with one cautery on the calf for four called a few of the left side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery for the elbow, and the depth of the cautery according to the thickness of the skin.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient complains that the pain extends into the area of the feet, then cauterize this spot with three or four points or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient complains that the pain is behind the knee and under the cushion, then cauterize this spot with an elbow cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful during all cauterization that the cautery does not burn the nerves or cause great scarring, and that for this reason it may cause harm to the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen others who cauterize on the scalp and burn in the cauterization, and the bed is inflamed before the tumor is achieved, and fire pierces and corrupts the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then apply that.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each one in this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise men said in the cauterization of any cautery, like this one: make it similar to a circle of iron that encircles the width of one palm; and its orifice according to the thickness of an date pit or a little more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let that circle be another third; and let the space between them be the thickness of a thumb; and those circles are placed in two pieces; and let the length of those chains be a thumb or two, and make them in those iron edges well covered in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then let it be heated in the fire until it begins to glow and sparkle, and then let it be placed on the part of the patient, the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that point with three cautery points in a row.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that for three days; and then apply ointment to that point and cover the wound with a bandage for several days; and then cure that point with salves until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Oh sons, of this kind of cautery we have not used much because of the fear of its danger to the patient, and because we have found some that look upon it as dangerous.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	From among those who suffer from it, and find the place where it hurts.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	From those medicines that adhere to the cautery, you make two circles with an armula perforated in which you thrust the point of the iron door; its length should be equal to the width of their chest, and the size of two nuts or walnuts.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between them is equal to the thickness of the said cautery; and they are placed above and below, and they contain something between them in this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand on the part of the patient that is on the left side, and cover the part of the patient with your hand; and take a hot iron and put it between two circles, and the quality of which should be like fire gradually, and let it remain for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient to bite and adhere to it — because that biting is like fire — until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and remove all the water from the bowl of water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave it for three days and pause over that border where the black of the dust remains, and leave it for another day, and wipe it off; this is a remedy.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with the ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or chest, make it in the state that contains water according to what is made in the bowl equally.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of water bowl, and I have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and undissolved lye from one part, and grind it in a new bowl of the kind that the parted one has been perforated by a small hole, according to the amount that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place it in another bowl covered with water, and pour over the alkali and live lye of two parts water that takes those by a certain amount, and as soon as you understand those through good compression, and wipe the bowl that remains from the sharp water in the parted one to the covered bowl.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all of that water, and pour it over another living cause and another renewed alkali, which is a strong acid now, the same as used in certain medical operations and in cauterizing other members, because this operation is like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	Some of the medicines are applied widely, such as teazels and unfermented mead, which is a cause that is mixed with other things.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Guillaume recounted from an ancient man the operation and cure of which he was cured of gout and sciatica pain, and magnified that it should be of that one, and said that no other cure was necessary, and because it is healed with a remedy like this, which is strong enough to enter and have already known about that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be near certain fresh vinegar, and if there is no fresh vinegar, then take recent figs; and the cause should be crushed with a small amount of gray salt and placed on the water in which the pain is, or on the cushion, or on the chest, and tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or until the patient feels relieved from the attack of the disease.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place that in the bath and when the body of the patient is wrapped, put that in the ground, where the pain ceases and it is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that no one should use this cautery for these medications, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	It is said that when the goat's wound is made, the stricture vein should be cauterized with it; and the cautery should be made in this way: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the patient's toes and on the sole.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat's wound and apply it to that with fire until it is made into charcoal; and place it on the wool and leave it there until it is stretched out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat that, and do not stop doing that until the sensation of the bite reaches the whole body and the pain stops.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cauterizing is called a cattle cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42:
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the cauterization of pain in two places.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain occurs in both feet due to various causes, such as gout or blows or excessive excretion, and due to similar causes, by the infusion of wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization is not used in this single case that is made by the infusion of wet matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, before evacuating the patient, give them bitter and similar pills to their condition, which are made on both feet in the place where the pain is three lines wide, rather than trying to cauterize each line, according to the amount of tolerance of the patient and the effectiveness of the pills.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And this cauterization is made with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three or four pointed cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the use of cautery at the beginning of a fracture.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Deformities occur in this disease in small children; and from the beginning of it, they occur on their structure in the ankle, elevation, and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it becomes thin in the lower back and in the hips of the patient, which begins to overcome the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, when you see this and want to prevent it, then use the pointed cautery that is circular according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	which holds the cautery over all part of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the vertebra with the pointed cautery in two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be placed between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And care for the area until it is healed by what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Remember that cautery should not be administered in gout that is caused by spasm of the nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of cautery for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, if gout is cured by the method of cure and the pain does not return, then it should be treated again with cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you should apply the pointed cautery to the area around the joint of the foot with a movable motion.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the pointed cautery should be made of this shape:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain spreads to the other joints or to the ankles, and it does not subside, then treat each toe with three or four points of this cautery on all sides.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need other cautery tools, then use that one and do not place your hand too close to the point of the cautery, only around the area where the incision was made.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain extends to the spine and the two sides, then administer the cautery mentioned in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the chest and it is called pleurisy, then make points around the ribs as they revolve, make points on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the mentioned places, then make points around each rib and on the edge of the chest.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain extends to the shoulders or muscles, then cauterize all the tendons of each part of the helper.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not discharge the patient without proper care and reception of medicines, for if proper care is given and flatulence is expelled, then this cautery will heal, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the Cauterization of Wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the wound is located in the groin and the intestines are protruding through the abdomen, and this begins to happen, then you should order the patient to lie on their side and use mild remedies so that the wound from their stomach does not increase.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then place the patient between your hands on their side, and command them to hold their breath until the wound or intestines are exposed or appear through the abdomen.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that thing to its place and try to repair the rupture on the edge of the penis, and hold the end of it so that it is similar to the base of the penis at the top of the thighs.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery in this form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is red and then apply bandages.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place your hand with the cautery over that part, and you will enter through that opening that you have obtained in the inner thigh; and if you do not succeed in entering through that opening in the first attempt, then repeat the other procedure.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe the position of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn that intestine because it does not come out over the patient in case of death or other great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Know that when you have the cautery, do not press on the bones, and do not force your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And know that the cautery for children should be thin according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then care for the place of the cautery for three days until the scar of the fire is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure those other wounds before they become infected.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should remain on their back for 40 days until the wound is sealed and the infection has subsided.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And cover the patient's nutrition according to the length of time of their treatment, which should be placed on their abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to get up after 40 days, then administer a decent amount of food, and keep that for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And be moderate in work and food intake, and drinking, because when following this healing regimen, the entire body will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you should direct the treatment of the ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, and you want that they do not move, then cauterize the rupture with a red-hot cautery according to the amount of it, and that which is extracted from the coda is as clean as the other part of it; and then cure that wound which we have said, and it should not be adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And then the first doctors said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular pointed instrument according to this form, rather than with a sharp one.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And then a line is placed above the latitude of the rupture, and another line below; and your hand should be placed with a claw-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is more slender and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	About the cauterization of a twist.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain arises in the limbs due to a blow or percussion, and persists for a long time and does not improve with medical treatment, then it is customary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery for each member should be according to its size, strength, and development, and the location of the twist and the pain of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If it is healed by the first cautery, good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it; for according to the custom of those punctures of the member that approach the other member, so that you can achieve those with the cautery within the patient's body.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47
De cauterizacio de lepra.	About the cautery for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leprous people are cured by cauterization for a great benefit, and if the type of leprosy caused by putrefaction of scales and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you want to cauterize that one, consider whether the leprosy is common and if it has been cured with what we have said in the division and does not exist, and do not give up, but be careful over the patient that the corruption comprehends all his body and all his appearance, then cauterize that one on the forehead: with one in the middle of the forehead, and with the second behind him, turning the face to the end of the hair; and also on two ears; and with another behind, on the back or nape.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally your hand on the cauterization a little inside where there is a slight indentation in the bone, and from there the scales are displaced, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is alleviated from it; and cauterize over the melon according to what is prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then apply the cautery mentioned in the chapter; apply a cautery on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on both cheeks, two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, two cauteries on the spine of the back, one large cautery near the tailbone, one on the shoulder, two on the elbows, one on each arm, two on the hands, two on the fingers, two on the knees, two on the thighs, and two on the buttocks, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the patient's feet; and cauterize all the joints mentioned in the chapter, as well as each sole of their feet, and the soles of their hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful not to burn those nerves that are on the ankle.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some incisions are cauterized with one cautery on the teeth of the stomach and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the throat.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you should know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and helpful it is; and you should know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as with its surroundings, so that the body of the patient is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And you should know that the size of the cautery is large or small according to the members and joints according to what is preceded by the specifications of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should take care of the cautery with flour mixed with honey and the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of the cautery of stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is swollen or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you should cauterize that swollen limb with a cautery according to the size of the limb or its position.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And if it is too large, then insert the pointed cautery into the spine a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And you should take care of that wound until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes, the veins in the arms and feet, and the spine of the back and the skin of the abdomen, which move that member, and the swelling of the nerves, are also cauterized.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not put anything on it, but rather the one that is known in the anatomy of the member and the exit of the nerves throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the cauterization of warts that are morphea.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When warts are old and do not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then cauterize with a pointed cautery on a small amount according to the quantity of the species of the codex within which it is remained white and the color of it is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a poultice made of flour and lentils with roasted oil and leaves of arnago, and with the white or yellow sulfur, each part is one piece and all are mixed, and then place a cloth and over the location it is placed until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the Cautery of the Cranium.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When a tumor begins to form and you wish to remove it, then cauterize that circular cautery around it as it is turned.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And it is said that the cauterized area should be cauterized with the rear cauterizer in the middle; but I have not seen that, as I fear it may cause an ulcer, and I have already seen that sometimes.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is more correct to cauterize around it with a circular cautery as we have said, or with a pointed cauterizer.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 10.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the Cautery of Adulterers.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an adulterer is late in maturity, and this happens because of excess or due to the state of the patient, who is old and weak, or due to time, and you wish to hasten in the maturity of adulterers; then cauterize around it with a small pointed cauterizer; and afterwards remove that which hastens its maturity.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to make a perforation with this cautery, then place it in the following way: pause it at the midpoint between the two thighs until the needle penetrates the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is placed in that location where it was previously removed, so that the arm is relieved; then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of cauterization with a corroding agent.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A corroding agent is a substance that corrupts the body and moves within it, which corrodes whatever it comes into contact with, like fire consuming dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see that the corroding agent is in the location where the cautery was made with fire, then place small and large clavils according to what is appropriate in that location where the corroding agent is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize it from all parts until you remove all the corrosion and there remains no cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then apply a poultice to it for three days, and place oil mixed with salt on the cauterized locations until all the scabs have been completely removed and all the corruption has been eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then carefully remove those meat fragments generating infection.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	However, if three days have passed and the flesh has grown healthy in the place where there is no corruption, it is good; otherwise, then repeatedly use the cautery on that which remains in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And sometimes, some sharp medicine is applied to the wound, which is midway between the cautery and the medication.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, using a pointed cautery on the pus is more harmful.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you have already said that the cure for it is with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that which will be needed from there.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cauterization of the claws and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	The toenails are often affected by the parts of the foot that are called claws, which is a great cause of the foot; and they are cauterized in those places in two ways, either with fire or with a pointed cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	May the pointed cautery be heated like a pen with a similar shape, which should be made of iron according to the quantity it contains, and also of fine metal.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that heated point on the key, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the key until the cautery reaches the depth of the key.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it there for three days until it begins to burn.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply that poultice made of wild mallow leaves, crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on it for a while until it is completely eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the area with fresh meat juice until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and wounds occur on the surface of the body, especially in the breasts and feet, then you should administer in those cauteries with water, and take a quill of iron or steel or pen of ink, and place that quill on the key; and then draw out some water from the quill through the tip of the quill into the bottom of the key, and move your hand, and turn the quill around your hand in compression, and press the edge of the quill on the root of the key, and find the water dripping from the tip of the key into the bottom of the key; and wait for the patient for a short while until the water is absorbed by the root of the key, and then remove that, because the key has its roots eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And they would do that to those who have pain in all parts of their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And they would cure those who have pain in the joints by removing those things from the gums that the flesh swells with.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cautery for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When someone has tremors due to cold, fever, or other similar causes, it is customary to cauterize them with four cautery irons or with one above the spines of their back, between each spine there is a cautery; and on their chest, a cautery olive.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of that person ceases and the healing of the sick is quickly achieved.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cautery for accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are abscesses in the body, and they are caused by materials that have been corrupted; therefore, at the beginning, it is customary to cauterize all over the head of the fistula with a thin cautery iron made of myrtle wood; or with a long needle of iron; or with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some veins are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and not all believe in it, but those who do say that it breaks up the excess fluid causing those, and heals from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, one should first perform that with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 66.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of the cauterization of fluids from a sudden accident by incision of the archer.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Veins are clogged with fluid from an arrow wound that should be incised due to the swelling causing it, or due to the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the member, and similarly, and it is difficult to remain in that state.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when such an accident happens to anyone, you should immediately place your hand on the wound of the arrow, and press over that place until the veins are no longer clogged with the fluid from the sudden accident.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place hot oil drops and large ones, by the number of words, and blow on those until they are no longer ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then approach the second location where the pain is, over the vein that has been recently broken, and quickly apply the cautery to the wound before it becomes inflamed and restricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the wound is pushed out of the opening of the artery when you remove the cautery and stretch it, then take another cautery prepared alongside the others in the fire, and do not stop doing that until the wound is restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and that another misfortune comes upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to stop the wound in those places where it is restricted, and especially when the artery is large, it must be done in one of four ways: either with a cautery applied where the bleeding is, or with extraction when it is not being extracted, because when the extremities are burned, the wound is restricted and the blood flow is stopped, or it should be tied with a bandage or a piece of cloth for strong structure, or it should be placed on medicines that have the virtue of stopping the bleeding; and they should be strongly compressed with a pillow or a compress.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May the one who administers a decent restriction of the patient's arm and a strict bandage or by positioning of causes that burn and similar ones, does not compare but rather burns.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If that one is not a doctor or does not have any medical knowledge, then open the bandage of the indicated place over the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand that the wound should not remain open on the side of the patient's body, and above the rib cage it should not remain; and above the rib cage, sprinkle the cold water dew of great coldness until the wound is congealed and swollen; and cover in which there is a need for cauterization or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incisions and punctures and blows and of bleeding and of wounds and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that cauterization by fire is convenient and medicine burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and the forms of the cauterizations; and we have ordered the chapters of the subirantata of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so that it may be helpful to those who seek such knowledge, about what has been asked.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And as I begin this, son, you should know that in this chapter is contained what was explained in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And as I said, son, you should be very careful in this operation, because in the one that is mentioned in this chapter, which involves evacuation of the pus, it is essential to aspirate the vein or make an incision on the abscess or remove the exit or purify the plague or extract the stone or make an incision on the periosteum.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the worst cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not happen to you, because some of these operations require the manipulation of instruments that are used by men for medical purposes.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them are those who will contract the disease and die from it, and they suffer greatly because of the severity of their illness, and because of the length of their illness, and because the fear of the disease means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those who give you that which is good and said, you hope for their health, and their illness is dangerous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not trust that which you see in that person of this manner; and your caution should be greater than necessary, and your greed; and do not presume any cause about that unless you have certain knowledge which confirms it to you, and to which successful succession praiseworthy.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your diseases of prognosis and indication to which it is converted to salvation, because in that one you are helpful above acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, God inspires you with his own understanding and does not lead you astray and protect you, because that is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you should distinguish this chapter by chapters that precede in the chapter of cautery, of the cure of the head between the feet, so that it is to you rejoicing that demands of that and of which you have necessity.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	About the cure of gout that is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	This disease is caused by worms in infants during infancy and when the newborn's head is first shaved.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some worms are caused by an unknown reason.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this disease except in infants; and to all those I have seen it is accompanied by death, and for this reason it is considered an incurable work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	I have seen that a child's head, which was full of water, and the head of which was always magnificently shining until it could not be touched by the greatness of its own head, and more than the humidity increased until the fire died.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is added between the bone and the marrow, or it is added behind the bone on the spine.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	If the humidity is between the bone and the marrow and the abscess is small, then cut at the middle of the head into a slit in the latitude, and the length of the slit should be two nights until the humidity flows out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	If the moisture is increased more and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is pushed away from the bone, then you should open all the incisions of the cap and pour water into it when you understand that the wound is clean and not to your touch.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Because you should make three incisions in the middle of the cap according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then remove all the moisture from the incision; and strengthen the incisions with drapes and feathers; and apply hot water and oil every day for five days, and remove the scab and cure the wound with ointments and medications, and strengthen the cap with equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of water, where some are more in the occipital region, or in the part of the neck, or in the right, or in the left; and then attend to the incision where the abscess and the collection of water appear, and do this as best as possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not sever the artery and engage it in flow, as this may cause the patient to lose blood and die due to the outflow of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	About the incision of the arteries that are close to the earlobes, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When a catarrh or swelling occurs in the throat or chest, and this is recognized as such, and it is not treated with medicine, then this treatment would be in that incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And thus, when you want to incise those that the patient has on his head, and you should wipe the location with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein is; and the locations of each on the locations that are close to the earlobes, and they are hidden in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And thus, when you place your finger on the artery, and then incise each one at the tip of each part until it reaches inside the bone, and this is done through the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the spatula behind the artery and scrape it off at the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers wide, then when a vein is incised, the blood flows out and pulsates, which is usually due to frequent bleeding.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the arch does not appear at the skin, then measure the thickness of the gold leaf and insert three fingers' worth of space, and then push in and enter into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which is drawn from the blood is about an ounce of it, and it does not draw more or less, and all of this is according to the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the replacement of the arch of the bone.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and if there is some cause of gout remaining on the bone, then incise it so that it does not become an abscess carefully.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with feathers and with strips of cloth, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of the shin bones that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old injury or wound has become inflamed and painful in the temples, and is similar to those, and cannot be treated with medical methods, we have shown in these illnesses the extraction of the shin bones in the temples, or cauterization of them.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient removes the hair from the temples; and then understands the shin bone that is in the temple, which is shown by its pole, and it is hidden only to a few people due to its severity.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then the patient's head should be covered with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or with warm water until the shin bone appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the tool that has this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you approach the patient's head with a cloth to facilitate your entry into the room; and then remove it from the high parts before you exit the codex and discover the parts of the tunics that were left there, of all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	And if the artery is thin, then wrap it with a cloth at the end of the finger, and then cut off one part according to the amount by which its extremities were stretched and contracted, and do not let any blood flow out, because if it is not cut, the blood will not be able to flow out of it.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate the blood from the vein in one or two units.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the wound is large, then cover it with two cloths at two places with strong double gauze or with ropes long enough, and do not let it become putrid during the consolidation of the wound and let the blood flow out.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut off the excess that is between two ligaments, and do so at that hour or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish, use the pointed cautery to make points into the bone of the cautery hammer until the edges of it are incised, and then place it in the location of that metatarsal work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better to do this if the patient has a fever or a scalded condition; because cautery is one of those causes that help to finish moisture, and therefore it is better in cases of fainting.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover the extraction of the arches that weaken the location of the old cot, and place them on clean powder made properly, and then apply dry medicines to heal the flesh and moisten it until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another event, the blood from the archer's wound flows out, then you must press that blood, or the pointed cautery, or what fills the location of the old cot, and strengthen your hand until the blood is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if for any reason of those you are not present, then place your hand over the location where the wound is congealed, and drench the location with very cold water until the sharpness returns, and then strengthen it as appropriate.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is more commonly used in the extraction of arrows is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, so that you have sensed both locations where it enters, and pause as needed, mot ignitz, until they reach the bone and divide the vein into two parts, so that that which is between its extremities is not completely solidified by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two points is as follows.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the sharpness of two points is not sufficient, it is better to use one point, because if you approach each part with two sharp points, and do not incise the flesh at high speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, in those cases where there is some thickness, the heat of the fire should be applied to them and the flesh should be incised more carefully.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and more useful.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two points should be equal to the thickness of the said.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of bodies affected by sharp and acidic humors from the wounds.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acidic humors are in the body, and they affect the head of the patient, and there is no cause for medical cure in that area, and the face of the patient becomes swollen and feels pain in their forehead as if it were the path of worms, and the wounds of those are exhausted, humidified in such a way that their fur is already known, and their feathers are scraped by the acidity of the tears, the ancient methods in the cure of those of this operation, and they call that cure am spassa.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions equally spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two times: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the beginning of the arches that are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of the jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each beginning is three times the amount of that adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a cloth sponge or dry cloths, moisten them with the ones that dry the wound.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then place the sponge between two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision of it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part of the temples entering the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the connective tissue that is between two incisions above the bone, and then do that from the first incision towards the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then place a sharp instrument called a scalpel on one side and another not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place your hand on the side of that sharp one against the flesh attached to the connective tissue, and on the other side inside the bone, and push it until it reaches the second incision, and excise all those veins that descend from the head to the hips.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	While continuing to inspect this appearance of the codex, and then perform that action in the middle fissure between the other fissures.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when an equal amount of blood has flowed, express the places of the feet's veins that are compressed.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place your hand in each of the hollows of old age, and place it on those wounds that are open and oozing and inflamed, and make sure they do not become abscesses.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and then care for that wound with an ointment made from basilicon and rose oil and other things until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	About the treatment of splinters by cauterization and the wounds that descend from the parts divided from the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When a vein is cauterized and continues, and sometimes the wounds of the patient are small, and their appearance has been weakened, and their eyelids are ulcerated and they pull out their hair, and in the front of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent extremity, then know for these accidents that the materials and cauterization do not come from any other veins than those from the parts divided from the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best cure for these is as follows: order the patient to turn their head, and then make a small incision on the right side of their forehead (starting from the left temporal bone and going into the right temporal bone; and the incision should go through the bone), until it is revealed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry out the entire wound with a dry cloth or dry gauze, and then fill it between the two lips of the incision on the old man's cheek or with the gauze.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then sprinkle some powder that is usually used to prevent abscess formation.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the abscess has decreased, then make a small incision into the bone where it begins in the flesh, and then apply the drying regimen that is used to dry out the flesh, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of collofania and mix them, and from this make a paste and administer it to these wounds on the raw flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	About the treatment of that which is in the armpits.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All the causes that are in the armpits are of four species, one being a mineral stone or a cause similar to a stone, such as iron and rust, another being a plant such as thistle or fava bean, another being a fluid cause such as water and vinegar and their likes, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when a stone is in the armpit or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust or believe in the armpit, and press the armpit to the sunlight, and if you see the stone, then distill some cause of violent oil or vinegar into that place, and administer the extraction of it, and make the nose sniffing in condition, and open the nostrils for the coming of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some cloths or wool around the armpit, and extend the armpit to the parts above, because moisture is forgotten in these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not obtained, then administer extraction with the instrument called the epithetic epicaridian subtle of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if the instrument fails, then it is good; otherwise, administer extraction with the subtle needle of double use.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not obtained by that, then make a needle of aram and introduce the end of the needle into the auditory canal and close the environment of the needle with wax and softened oil so that it is not pushed in but the needle.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract the teeth with great force, as many teeth as we have found.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not obtained in this way, then take some alum or old-fashioned material and place the amount of alum or old-fashioned material that is used for extracting teeth on the end of a needle, and wrap it decently over that placed area.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then introduce that into the auditory canal with ease, and dry the ear from the moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if all the causes that we have mentioned are not forgotten, then you should proceed to lance the abscess or treat the spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method to lance that is to first disinfect the patient's vein septic and extract the second from the first, and then make that incision between your fingers and convert the wound to the parts above, and perform a small cut on the edge of the wound where the pus is located.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the incision is of lunar shape until it reaches the bone, and the bone found, then lance that if possible with appropriate instruments; and then make the incision in that hour at speed, and cure that before it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause is one of the gases that I believe and it is inflated, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your assistance, then you take a thin spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and apply that remedy to that abscess which has fallen into the ear canal.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	and do not do that when you think that that has already been moistened by the steam from the ear canal, and pause that in small movements, and protrude those with pincers or forceps, or at the beginning there is a hole like this, which is praised for the extraction of it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In the water that is introduced into the ear canal, which the patient uses for sneezing conditioned at the beginning, and fills the ear with an old cloth, and place a towel over that ear in which the water is, and if by that it is forced out, good; and if not, take many small stones according to the length of the said, and bake those in the fire for a short time, and the patient inserts one of those into the opening of his ear canal and strikes another stone over the stone that is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not stop this treatment until all the water is drained.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water is drained, you take paper or rags, and place one end in the wound and extend the other end over the fire until it is burned completely.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put another rag and make so many wounds until all the water is drained, and remove that which was under the cannula as mentioned above of the extraordinary stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of beasts entering that wound, if it is a small one, as mentioned above in the division; but if it is a large one that causes pain to the side of the abdomen, then administer the extraction of it with gentle and circular movements, and the cause of it is the least of all other causes that occur in the wound.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of worms that generate in the wound, when you treat that which we have mentioned above in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not compare your treatment, then cover the wound with sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if here appears any cause of worms, then extract that small or sharp instrument, but if no cause appears, then take a narrow and wide needle of the following form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the thin end of the needle into the earhole according to the amount that the patient can bear; and then pull out strongly with that, and do this movement repeatedly until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if they do not obey you, then open and close the circuit of the needle with the following cream that we have mentioned; then administer distillations that have been used in the past for the treatment of worms, and look for this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your emission is the one that you use to apply the medical oils into the earhole with this instrument of which the following is its form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or iron, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and put it on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it should be done as if they are in the cavity of the catheter for containment here where it is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it in the end of the catheter decently, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or some herb, or whatever liquid from these medicines in the catheter — and that is in the earpick —, and then insert the ray above and express your hand on that, applying a warm compression to the area until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil penetrating.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is in the earpick should already be heated slightly by the fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause of what you will distill in the earpick is not too hot, because the medicines of the earpick cannot bear it.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the cure of opacification of earwax.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some people have wax in their ear canals from birth, and this has happened to some men, opacification in the meat of the earpick due to plaque or no wax at all in that area; and this opacification is sometimes made in the prepuce of the tragus of the earpick which does not allow the evacuation, and sometimes in the parts before.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And in that part of the patient where they do not understand the diagnosis, it is in the major difficulties for healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that part where you have achieved the diagnosis, place the patient's ear to the sun and look at that.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an abscess appearing, open it with this thin needle of which the following is its shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the tip of it in which the width is small has one part sharp and the other not; and the needle is two lions wide so that it does not pierce the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the abscess is made of flesh in the ear or in its meat, then open it with those small and pointed needles and pierce it with great force until all the flesh is out.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the abscess is in the front of the ear, then take a thin needle and burn it with fire for a short time, and then put it into the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And so if the patient has felt an oppression that facilitates that which they have, due to the weight of the effort, the pressure of it facilitates; and be careful not to press the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And so place a cloth of the second quantity of the width of the trachea that you have wrapped in the groin; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any and push it into the abscess and powder it over it according to three, and use it; and if you see that the ear is already infected, then cover it with a cloth and replace it with another that you have wrapped in a cerot that is made of oiled rosin, until the abscess is safely drained; and cure it within that time when it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If there is an outflow of pus, then submerge a cloth or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear, and use the other cure that restricts the flow of pus, which is called in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of azoth, which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Azoth that sometimes occurs in the eyelids of the eyes, some are wet, and others are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should hold those eyelashes or eyelids, and cut those eyelashes from their roots, and place your hand over the areas according to the following.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If pain is caused by blood flow from a vein, then you should cauterize those eyelashes with a thin cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cauterization is to remove the incisions and dry areas when there is any cause of the eyelids; and when the fire is applied, those eyelids are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	On the treatment of granuloma that occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Some dry areas occur in the eyelids of the eyes, which are similar to granuloma in their strength and hardness, and by growing it is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And there is an accumulation of thick humidity under and above the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation in them is to consider if the large ones come from that which appears on the eyelid and is moistened to all parts; and the cause of it is unclear.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision through that which is on the eyelid and remove all parts that facilitate its escape, and then suspend it with sutures and cut off that part.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not able to make the incision of it because it does not penetrate the eyelid at all, then it is not known in any case.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures and cure that part until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then it will not be a problem for that part which the oil of it restores to that and encases.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the large ones are declining to the parts inside of the eyelid, then remove the eyelid and suspend the large one with sutures, another that you indicate for incision, and press all parts, and if the eyelid is elongated by the incision, then it is not known in any case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and cure the area with that which is inside that will heal it.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment of the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is gray, which is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and mainly in the children, aggravating the wounds of those and causing their catarrh to the most; and they cannot see the light of the sun because of that which tears are caused to them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you see them talking all the time on their faces, and on their faces when they sleep; and they have their eyelids closed with humid tears, which have already covered inflammation, and imminent danger appears in the eye; and when you press the area with the fingers, you can feel the inflammation inside them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some operation is performed on that which the patient places on their head and on the cloth that covers them, and they make a circle according to the amount that contains all parts, and they place that over the other and press with the fingers of all in order that inflammation be added in the middle of the circle, and they make an opening in the middle of that humidity which is incident in the incision through the latitude, and the incision is not greater than the incision that is made in flap surgery.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	May you cut the vein completely until you reach the arch, where in the most dispositions, processes, and arch, archernach is used for healing through a white, grayish slit.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract those bandages that you have wrapped between the thighs, called parts of the foramen, and rotate them between your right and left hand until they are spread out.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to adjust in the slit so that the space does not reach the bone and causes those.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	May you not adjust in the arch at the beginning of the slit, but rather adjust a small bandage in the slit before proceeding with archernach; and then extract those that we have mentioned; and moisten cloths in water and vinegar, place them over the area, and strengthen those bandages.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And know that they sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the slit to prevent that which is left from that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an abscess occurs in that location, then treat it with a healing ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	About the methods of touching the heart.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the lids of the heart are not adjusted by natural hairs and are antiquated, then those methods are applied to the heart and made to become ways of maladies such as frequent tears and softening of the lids and a cloth until that cause of destruction of the heart which is called tactinir of the heart, and it is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization; or by incision and suture; or by cannulas as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore cover that the head of the patient is in your left hand; then convert the lid of the heart to your left hand, and if it is converted, it is good; and if not, insert a needle in the part that is closest to the lid behind the lid, and make the needle penetrate the part above, and that is — near the margin of the lid where the hairs are — near the hairs, and pull the part above to the lid, and convert it to the right.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And approach the part behind the edge of the eyelid, between the hairs, with a blunt instrument that is inserted into the lacrimal canal; and then remove the hair and place it behind the eyelid, covering it with small pieces of cotton or cloth, and then place your finger over the eyelid to hold it in place.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is important to note that the figure should be adjusted according to the amount of eyelid elevation, as this varies among men, and some may require a greater incision into the eyelid depending on the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then approach the blunt instrument over the two lines that you have placed, and begin at the lacrimal canal and insert it into the lacrimal duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural hairs, it should be as large as possible.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the eyelid, and scrape off all of it, and adjust the stitch on both lips with some thin thread or wool, and wipe away any excess, and if you wish to do so, you can also apply some ointment to the eyelids.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then loosen the stitches of the wounds in three or four days, and care for that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, leave the stitches of the wound open, and treat that with a drying and constricting agent, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and its swelling; but open stitches are better, and therefore apply this remedy for two or three days.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But it is also important to be careful with the patient, and this operation is good, and not in fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in taxingir, and it is that with a hook-like instrument, and lift the eyelid at three finger widths, separating and gathering according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to do that, then take one needle with thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other needle into the lacrimal major, and the second into the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the threads so that the needles are equal, and then raise your hand with an equal elevation, and lift the entire eyelid over the area where it should be placed as recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two sides of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is inside to be healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If an abscess occurs at the beginning or end of your finger, cover that abscess with a cerate and the same ointment, and apply it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some wounds near the eyelid that are turned inside out, then cover that with the same ointment as we mentioned at the beginning; but stitching is more artificial in that place.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Stitching the cannula follows this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and you should turn the eyelid and cut the figure that is given according to what I have said; and then, by art, make two cannulas or two thin needles of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of theirs should be slightly less than the width of the suture.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already incised at the ends of each part where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add each subtilitat under that which superfluously extends from the eyelid of the hole, and tighten the needles of each part with a strong tension, and leave it for several days until the thread for the tension dies and is denied and will rot within that which does not fit.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is too late, then break the mass in the arm, and then cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is closed, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not prick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make cans that you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	About the elevation of sharp hairs in the arm when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are not natural, hard, sharp, and prickly hairs, then the operation is to take a thin needle and place it in a soft and smooth leather, and then adjust the extremities of it and do not nail them in a way that is too rough.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the leathers should be the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you can make another thin leather under it in short, and use the extremities of that if you want to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head on your knee, and position it near the sunlight so that your work can be clearly seen, as this is a delicate and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the eyelid at the point that needs to be sutured, and make it penetrate quickly before it goes beyond the natural edge of the eyelid.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the eyelid up and insert that into the eyelids, and take one or two or three but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand out through the opening in the eyelid that is not sutured, and pull it out through the eyelids and back to its natural position.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is not sutured and the eyelid does not close, pull it out through the parts that you have composed on that one, until it closes again.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And let that heal with the vision of the eye, as you will pull it out and close it, and groan and clutch the eye, and leave it closed for two or three days until the eyelid adheres to its place and heals well.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin is too short, then adjust a longer piece of skin from the natural ones, and lift it up to where it should be long enough to cover the area, and then lift it up.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the cure for ehracatir, which occurs in the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is ehracatir in the eye, and the contraction of the eyelid occurs above, on the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the eyelid or dryness or cauterization, and this is called leporina, and whether it is natural or accidental, it is caused by poor consolidation of the eyelid or dryness or cauterization, or by similar conditions.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation in this is that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it on that area where there is a piece of cloth between them, and tie them together when they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not use treatment for this from the causes that dry and constrict; because if you do that it will return worse than ever, as it has never been treated before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in those cases where a softening exists as it does with fenugreek, and rub the liquid on the area that is high and sown with it, or use dayquilon, which should be liquefied with some oil, and apply it to the affected area, and cure it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your cure is that you pierce all the way through what is not consolidated according to the form that fire makes at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation, which we have said, is nothing but a certain correction of the misalignment that does not return the form of the area according to what fire gives.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of misalignment that is made in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This misalignment that is made in the eyelid, which is not properly called a misalignment; and it is of two kinds, one natural, another accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental misalignments are made by pressure or by cutting or by cauterization or by other similar methods.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle in which you make double thread, and place it on the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal into the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh to the parts above the needle and hold it with the needle, and incise through the wide space.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the shape of the eyelid returns to its normal position, then it is good; otherwise, take the razor and place it on the broken figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two incisions on the side of the eyelid behind.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of the two incisions should be made at two angles of the incision, which you have made when they meet, and make the angle from both ends when they come together to form their figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then place the flesh at that length on the side of the eyelid behind it, which is the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and tie them with wool yarn; and then take care of those that we have said about the softening medicines and the poultices within which it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if it is necessary to repair by a fissure or suture or cauterization, then cover that you cut the flat fissure on the eyelids according to what is preceded.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the poultice between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the sermon on the cure of laceration when it is raised or lowered, that the blood should flow in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of laceration, and that is in the form of various modifications.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the artisans always prepare everything in each possible way that it is possible to do within which he makes return the figure to its natural form, or near to that, and that patient according to what is convenient for the operation and tools in the best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in men who have their eyelid glued to the upper part of the eyeball, and it is prohibited from facilitating movement and their natural works, therefore you must insert the extramattar ray behind the eyelid, and elevate it above that, or extend it to the eyelid.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you insert the adherence into a fine space, which should not be sharp to avoid pain, having a small opening so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remains the space that does not descend the eyeball from its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should excoriate that adherence with ease so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put saltwater in the eye, which you wash; or you pour it in with a solution of cinnamon dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye socket, place over the eye a piece of cloth soaked in white wine, and use the third day's urine from a healthy person as a consolidative remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	About the beginning of a finger and the height of flesh of the lacrimal sac.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that the finger has two types, one nervous, which is like a thin, hard bone; or non-nervous, like white, congealed matter, which when touched, often becomes infected and does not heal in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And these types do not begin until the larger lacrimal duct, which gradually covers the vision and prevents light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	If the type of work is in the beginning of it, then the patient places his head on the table, and then raises the eyelids, and with your hand, lifts the eyelid, and collects the finger from a little duplication and extend it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert it into a piece of horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, or similar, or strong iron, or double the tip of the needle small by small and place it in the middle of the nail, and pierce that with the needle, and tie the nail firmly; and extend that to the parts above, and excoriate the piece of hair on the side of the nail which is the pupilla.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then continue with that into the back of the patient.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you insert the thin needle into the space between the patient's eyebrows or with small forceps, and cut the flesh of the lacrimal bone so that it does not become a continuous flow of tears due to this insertion.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is extended or firmly tied as we have said, and then it is scraped with the lion's tooth of which this is the shape of it:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that you do not touch the corneal tunic and that it does not break in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Approach the beginning of the foot with a small amount of salt or some powder made from sinapis, and leave that between the toes; and care for that which enters inside so that it becomes healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not painful and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it stuck in that place, then this type of nail can be cured with certain medicines, and it can be healed as if it were an eye and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that, then first you open the thigh of the patient and take a thin lancet of sharpness according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with thin sharpness.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is rarefied and contracted and enters into that place, then first distill from your eye in the space of the powder made from sinapis or some rose oil or some salt, and apply it to the thigh on the other side.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation within which everything that is of it has remained, unless that contrary abscess is in the thigh, because then you leave that, and cure the abscess as soon as it becomes healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And repeat your operation until she is healed within that reason.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	If the nasal cavity is blocked by a large amount of mucus, it should be removed with forceps; and incise one part of it, but do not complete the incision so as not to let out tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then instill in the nasal cavity with saline solution and wait until she is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	About the incision of a small amount of flesh and about that which is born from meat adjusted in the nose.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some flesh is born in the nose and is over-padded until it covers the pupil, or it approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly holds the eyelids to the parts of the eye and is assembled at the edge of the balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	While the operation is being performed on her, the patient should pause his head in the chin; and then open her nostrils and collect all that flesh with forceps or in a spoon; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is finished with the scissors, and guard yourself from the nose that you do not let out that which is your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And place your index finger, or the pointed spatula that we recommended in the beginning of the chapter on the nail, or small forceps that are used to collect the form of the nail as it approaches this chapter's end.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then, when your incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, fill the wound with salt-crusted powder, or distilled in the powder roga and similar to the corrosive medicines, and place a piece of albumen inside to prevent infection.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause of alarm and it is necessary to be careful, and you fear infection, then empty the wound and treat that infection with whatever remedy is appropriate for that infection, and repeat this operation until it is healed, and similarly treat the flesh that has been affected in this way.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must ensure that all care of the wound is done naturally or by accidental means, using iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you are sure that that member has suffered this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the collection of blood in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Blood vessels that are turgid over the wound and prevent the surgeon from performing his operation, and they develop the wound for a long time.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider whether the wound in which there is blood is strong and in which there is no other disease than blood, then you collect that blood.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And if you command the patient to put his head back on the bed, and suspend those veins with an elastic band or two according to your judgment; and that elastic band should be of double thickness according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two elastic bands gradually in one place according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then those veins are collected with fine forceps, with fineness, and wipe away the blood frequently as they become re-absorbed into the wound and are turned back.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to injure the wound with the ends of the spatula; and if your operation at the most is in the morning, and you are making a firm grip in your operation, do not insert only those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have finished, then pour warm water or rose oil into the affected area to soothe the remaining pain from the scalpel.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible to do so at that time, then gather all the available herbs and apply them to the affected area to relieve the pain, and leave them on for several days until the pain is reduced and an abscess is prevented.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the process until the patient is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the shape of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX:
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reducing hernias to their proper place.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat hernias with a scalpel or sharp medicine after the previous description and it is not healed, then do not insert into it, but incise over the abscess to mature its contents and remove all the moisture inside and on the outside until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then use this instrument with the following shape to clean it:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And if it is known that the head is hard, and made of iron, and the cap is redone as if it were a helmet that has been punctured by a sword or a halberd for a subtle puncture (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the location of the bone that is corrupted, and gradually revolves it between your fingers until you know that that corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, and then restore the location with drying and hemostatic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the location is consolidated and is in good flesh and is free from the body and has been for forty days, and it does not recur, does not become an abscess, and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it is not in the bone but to reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and you should take a probe made of iron or sharp medicine, and when you have exposed the bone, then you take a tribe of this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The external part of the iron is triangular, and its end is first extended into the extremity as if it were so.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place that over the bone, and that near the lacrimal; and hold your hand a little from the heat, and then turn your hand to the tribe where it penetrates all the bone, and that one feels the patient's pain as if it were burning through them.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, restore the place with astringent medical dressings that you have seen.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, since the flesh and the place are hardened, the matter that flowed to the parts returns to its source, so that is more painful for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of the reduction of the prominence of the bone.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the bone protrudes from its totality and does not cause harm or reduction in the movement, then loosen the patient, and let it follow, and place several bandages on the neck after scarification and suction for good drainage; and place a liniment on the bone made of acacia, aloe, salt, and sarcocolla, and strengthen the plaster on the bone with powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method for cleaning the pores is to take pieces of lion's mane, and each piece should be doubled in four places; and make those threads.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place one on top of the other according to the amount needed for the required purpose.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then apply strong pressure on those pieces with a durable, tightly wound thread; and repeat the incisions with successive stitching; and then remove the stitches and leave the wound straight during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if the ligament becomes soft in between, then make sure it is straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the ligament as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound has already been reduced, good; otherwise, repeat the application of the ointment to the pores and the stitching and the stitches until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	About the beginning of the elevation of the choroid coat.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When the disruption in the choroid coat occurs, and it elevates and protrudes through the eyelids as if by a thick brush, and it takes on the shape of a person, and you want to incise it, the operation is performed as follows: first, insert the needle into the edge of the uvea from below, and then place another needle double the thickness of the lacrimal duct, and make that penetrate; and then remove the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the doubled thread and lift that part of the uvea around the needle, and apply strong pressure on that thread.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place it on the soaked wool infused with honey and lime water until the thread is pulled through the eye of the needle.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for that part where the pain is located until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some bandages are made from the entire piece of cloth and adjusted to a certain size, and then perforated with a thin needle that goes through the center of the wound, and let the moisture seep into the wound, and lower the bandage and place it immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of gout.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease that is called gout is not other than a kind of inflammation that is adjusted in the wound like falling water and is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The way to work in it is that you make the patient lie on the bed prepared and dressed, and then take the main vein in both arms and that one through which you see the sickness coming to the parts behind, and then let it dry and do not let it descend, and let the light be, and the disease will have its causes as usual.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not come down in the lower part, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	However, if the descent is not prepared in a healthy way, then make the patient spit between your fingers and take a thin, sharp instrument and place it on the cornea near the conjunctiva at the edge of the eye (where the vision is), until the sickness is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, when the sickness is expelled, you will drop this water with honey in it into the wound where you have mixed melted honey or water with which you have made a fenugreek and honey mixture.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the other causes until they are cured.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure of the water descending from the wound.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and what is appropriate to pierce according to the speech declaring it, then that second one for healing.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you should make the patient spit between your fingers over a cloth and place it on the wound, then tighten it with a string.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your hand near the eyelid of the left eye, if the water is on the left side; or place your hand straight, if the water is on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And place your hand with a cloth, if the water is on the left side; or place your hand straight, if the water is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the cloth near the edge of the eye near the bridge of the nose on the side of the thickest ray in the album of the eye on the side of the lower lacrimal duct, and then fold the cloth and turn your hand to that one.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And penetrate into the eye and feel that the cloth has already reached its cause due to sight.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And cover that the measure of the cloth is the same as the distance between the pupil and the end of the black, which is the bridge of the eye; because you will see that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tissue.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And place the cloth in the place where the water is, and then throw it down a little way away, and if the water descends at first, then remove the patient's sight from that place, and place the cloth in their eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then take a short rest; if the water is drained, then stop at that other position in front where it is not yet cleaned.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is dry and not drained, then you extract the mud easily with facilitated hands, and revolve them one by one in your clean hand, and dissolve them in the water; and then put a small amount of clear gem salt in the water and wash the wound with that; and then place a cloth soaked in rose oil, almond oil, and egg white on it.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	And those who are from our time have placed this on that wound with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your hand to the instrument of the wound because of its hardness - which is one of the men whose wound is hard -, then take that spatula which is called the elbow of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce it at that joint, and do not put your hand in the rough, and do not say that you are doing a delicate place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then enter the second medicine that we have mentioned.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And prepare the patient for their bed, which is made with a dissenting sleeping arrangement on which they lie on their back in a dark room, and prohibit all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place your hand on the patient's body to keep their nature calm and not cause any harm to their head or any other part.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the bandage be according to their position by the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And remove that in the same dark room and exhale the foul smell, and make the patient see some causes, and then return the bandage by the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not do that at the time of treatments or soon after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having said that, you should do that so that the water can pass more easily and quickly through great and vehement excretion.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs, then remove the pus within the seventh day, and correct that with the same water that causes the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you should examine the patient's face and place your hand on their mouth to prevent them from vomiting, which exists in the darkest part of the body.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually remove that matter and talk about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you should know that in some cases, the student of vision is not exempt from certain operations, and then you should be careful with the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already reached some of those things that are in the Arabic, and some say that fire is made in the air by piercing it with a needle, which is successful.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen any evidence of this in our land or in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of fire by which one can be above those who do not know them.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of copper or iron properly, and their external parts are like this triangle, the sharp end is like that form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When the flesh in the nose is injured by various causes, such as a sting from an insect or a polyp, and this disease is called a polypus, which resembles that pea represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from there the flesh is cancerous, black, of dark color; and from there the flesh is lion's skin, not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those flesh wounds that are not fraudulent or cancerous, cover the wound with your hands and place it in the sunlight, and wash the nostrils of the patient, and pick out the pus from those wounds.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that which you have understood from those parts of the wound, and then cut away that which you have comprehended from those parts with a sharp instrument, so that all the flesh is removed; because if there is any cause from which the abscission is possible, then you should remove that with one of the sharp instruments to facilitate it.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the lord has a boil or an abscess that has formed, then pause at that spot; or it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize the area where the pus has been completely drained and all the cavities have been closed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then apply a compress on the nose, near the entrance where the pus and blood or pus alone are found.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is opened and moisture enters into the palate, then know that it has been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not enter after the incision, then know that there is no flesh in the pus that has risen from the bones of the nose to which it did not reach the abscess.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, after the incision, if there is any swelling in the area to which it belongs, and you blow into the mouth, and pause between each breath the amount of air that you normally breathe, and engage the patient and insert one end of the tube in the nose with the ray or another cause that is possible at that time.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	When that is done, draw the patient's scent towards them until it reaches the nostrils, and place it over their nose, as troops of children at school do when they perform this action, and it is the likely cause for that.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then place one of the patient's limbs on their nose and the other under their nose, and administer a carrot remedy to the nostrils that are in the patient's mouth, and do this until you know that the meat is already in the patient's nostrils.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then remove the patient, and place in their nose an abstraction of salt and garlic, and do this for three days or more until the tongue corrodes all that is left of the meat.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, place in their nose a plum catheter to cure them until they are healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you cannot cure them, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to purge the nostrils with which they are distilled olive oil and medicines in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do that with silver or amber, which is similar to a small lantern uncovered, with a small container, and the same method.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed canula like that with a cane, and the canula of the instrument at the end of it is to purge and is flat, uncovered; to which the handle is on the back of it, and hold it when you insert it into the oil or the liquid that you want from the sucs and the causes suctiblas.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this capipurge is expensive: recipe of castor beans, white bay leaf, ginger, saffron, long pepper, escafragia, and spice ana unc. with the suc de bleda and caul, and it is made into pillulas, and one pillula is dissolved in water tebeza, and it is given to the mouth of the patient facing downwards.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of the nostrils in the external parts of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	When veins are swollen and painful outside the nose, and they are magnificent and ominous in other days when they are bent in a certain way.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for that reason you should insert it at the beginning of the appearance of the patient, and extract all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place your hand or cautery or medicine that is burning in the place of the patient.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the insertion is late until it becomes magnificent, then consider if it is calcified, hard, black color and little sensation, do not touch that iron which is a crusty abscess; because those swollen veins that insert this abscess end with that great malice on that one which the patient had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of yellow color and not black, and insertion is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and insert that remedy, and cure the place with that which dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	When the continuity of the nose, lips, and earlobe is dissolved by a wound or similar injuries.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You should know that when the continuity of one of these cartilages is lost, it is not recommended to perform surgery on that person.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, if someone has any cause of those wounds, which you consider to be fresh and free from infection, then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches and cure that wound as soon as possible.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the wound with lost continuity are already separated and each one is healing well, then make sure to remove any infected part of their skin as soon as possible.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with stitches and strengthen those, and on top of that sprinkle healing dragon's blood powder and apply trissat oil, and place a layer of diachylon plaster or any other consolidating plaster on top of the powder, leave it for two days or three, then remove that and replace the plaster and leave it until the wounds are completely healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the surgeon add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the abdominal suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread that you have made.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	About the extraction of those causes that come in the lower abdomen in the parts below.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Sometimes boils are found in the lower abdomen of men, similar to hard pus-filled cysts, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should cut the abdomen and each of those hard parts, and then fill the abscess with three-stranded thread as soon as the wound is strengthened, and then clean it with warm water and heal the area with what has stiptic properties, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	About the beginning of the flesh attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A lot of boils are found on the attached flesh to the gums, which the ancients called albulae, so you should suspend that with an onion or what you have with forceps and incise it at its root, and let the blood flow or the wound.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And place your hand over the affected area, or apply some hemostatic or styptic powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, so that the cautery does not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the reason for iron teeth.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When sharp, rough, and sometimes blackened tartar is adjusted on the surface of the teeth, between the gums, and some veins are blackened and turn yellow or green due to that corruption, and the teeth become blackened.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore you should scrape the patient between their teeth and place the cap of your instrument in their mouth, and remove those sharp tartar and similar sand that causes blackening and yellowing or other changes due to no cause, and this is how the blackening and yellowing and other changes are removed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If that is still present at the beginning of the reasoning, it is good; otherwise, you should repeat the reasoning on those teeth on the next day and the second and the third until it disappears in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you should know that teeth require various shapes of files and different figures according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so that you can know which file is best for the part of the tooth that is to be filed and another file that is used between the teeth in different shapes, and these shapes of files should be prepared by you as follows:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	That you cure the tooth of all its pain and delay in the entire extraction of it, as there is no cause that exceeds the weight of it when it is extracted, as it is a sublimated substance within which the extraction occurs.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May it be that when the patient is forced to extract that tooth, that you must be certain which tooth is painful, as different weights deceive the patient and make them think that it is a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the sick and painful tooth is extracted, as we have already seen this in the operation of the teeth.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then, since you must determine which tooth is causing the pain and what you know about it, first cover the area around the tooth with a spacer that contains some benefit, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum in all parts, and then remove that, or use sharp forceps at the beginning, bit by bit, until that concavity is formed.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then place a large tongue depressor in the patient's strong teeth for good conversation or to prevent him from swallowing, and then pause the patient's head between your two thumbs that he does not bite, and then remove the tooth straightly in a way that does not cause more pain to the patient or himself.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And then, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and place it next to the tooth in all parts to facilitate and reduce the effort of its removal at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or worn, cover it with cloth to strengthen it and use sharp forceps at its end to prevent it from being broken during your construction on that tooth.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And make sure that you perform the incision very carefully around the entire part of the gum and guard your strength so that it does not tear away from there and remain separated, and return over the patient for the major pain that is the first pain of the patient.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their practice and audacity in the eradication of them, which they do not administer what we have recommended; for such women bring great harm to people, which are more difficult than those that are quadrupeds, and all of their reasons remain, or some of those, or that they extract from there with ignorant barbers have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And the eradication of it is washed with water or with vinegar and salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is an outflow of pus through the wound, as has been done by such women, then cut off some amount of sege and sprinkle it on the wound, and if you do not compare that sege, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps is designed to be subtle and has handles that are not easily bent, so that they do not bend when applying force during an extended extraction process using a long, narrow, and thick manubrium and a large, broad handle.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And there should be times when the forceps are used with a large manubrium, so that when applying force, they do not bend, and the extraction process is long and narrow.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And the forceps should be made of Indian steel and have straight extraction handles, with the handles of which one is inserted into the other and applied with great force, and sometimes they are shaped like the beak of a ciconia bird, which is strong and has great strength.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and the extraction of bones from impacted jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to remove a tooth that is impacted and causing pain, first place your hand over the location where the tooth is embedded for a day or two until the area becomes soft; then insert the forceps with handles shaped like the beak of a ciconia bird or a strong, sturdy shape, the form of which is similar to the beak of a ciconia bird.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The outer parts of their joints were cut with a knife or scissors.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if they do not obey your command to open their mouth and hold these forceps or let you use them, then place a restraint on their head and cut through all the flesh and insert the instrument that is called the atali, which is a small hook with this shape:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if it has a short thick end, make it small, and do not make it too thick so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the mouth is opened, proceed; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which the first one has this shape: a triangular-shaped extra-miter with some roughness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The second instrument should have a triangular and more subtle end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you have already helped yourself with this instrument having two ramps, which has the following shape:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And you will need other instruments that I will describe for the removal of teeth; because it is important to do this with this instrument which resembles an onion, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	from the triangular extremity that is twisted or shortened, which is some swelling, and not thinly covered so that it is not three-cornered.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another wise thing is that the instruments of the teeth are also similar to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the craftsmen be wise and skilled in the art, atroba by such that they follow what it means for them to perform the operation and the various diseases; for some of these diseases are to those for which the ancients did not say or pause a proper instrument, because of the different forms of various species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	May it be three-cornered if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are twisted or broken, then be careful to cover that in its place with what is convenient for the instruments and the forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help you with how to do this:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And be in it some swelling little by little, and be stretched or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak until the bone of all is completely removed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines to that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small pustule on the bone, then lance that one and its surrounding area, and cure it before it becomes infected.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of the most prominent teeth among the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent and do not fit naturally in their place, especially when they lean towards the lips or front teeth, you should consider: if a tooth is very close to another and cannot be removed without damaging it or its gum, then remove that one. However, if it is not closely connected to another tooth, use this instrument to extract it. It resembles a pig's tongue and is made of Indian iron with a sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And if you have inserted this instrument for several days due to the hardness of the tooth and it is not connected to another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a prominent tooth is exposed to the gum, then use this instrument made of Indian iron with a similar shape to file it down.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should be all made of iron from India and the marguerite; and it should be pointed with a few, thin needles, like those that are made into hooks, and that the tooth should be sharpened slowly over several days for convenience, so that no other tooth becomes crooked and rotten.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then draw lines on the skin, and shave it with a razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if there is a tooth that has been splintered and the tongue is injured, then make sure to scrape out that part where the roughness of that fragment is stopped and covered, and filled so that the tongue does not descend and the word is not corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the repair of crooked teeth with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When injuries occur to the teeth due to blows or falls, and the patient cannot bear that which is there, and you have treated it with hemostatic medicines, and your treatment has not been successful, then use gold wire in those that are strong, because silver turns green and soon becomes porous, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And if the needle is too thin and rough according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the thread is that you take the needle and take double of it between two healthy teeth, and approach that it increases am two crookedness of the needle between two unhealthy ones, or if one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And approach the incision again to the part where you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and knowledge until it is not unhealthy.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your stitch should be the one that strengthens the needle with the points of the teeth that do not slip.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And approach the excess of the needle on the outside with forceps or pliers, and add those in each place where you have done, and convert them to those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the unhealthy one, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And leave that which is as tight as Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is dislocated or torn, strengthen it with those or those other things in such a way that it remains in its place at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the form of healthy teeth and the figure of straightness of two healthy teeth, as follows:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when a tooth or two returns to its own cavity in such places, and is rebuilt as we have recommended, and remains straight.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	This is not done by anyone but skilled craftsmen and wise ones.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Some devices are suitable for certain causes of cow bones, and they are made into teeth in such a way as to fit the place where the tooth is missing, and are strengthened as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	About the beginning of the nerve that goes into the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This nerve that goes from the tongue to some devices or is natural to the one who was born with it, or accidental and has been consolidated by now.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation involves opening the patient's mouth, exposing their tongue; and elevating it, then incising the second nerve ligament according to its latitude until the tongue is released from its recumbent position.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any difficulty or resistance, and that is due to consolidation of plague, then you should use force and cut it along the latitude until it is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	Be careful not to make a hole in the skin of the meat and that you cut here through the bone and allow the flow of pus.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the traces of the incision with water, vinegar, or water and flour; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from falling out again while it is not consolidated.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is a flow of pus, place your hand over the abdomen to prevent it from falling out again; but if the wound is bleeding, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery that is suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then approach those other causes that may be cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	About the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, due to an abscess on the tongue, the tongue is prevented from performing its natural operation, and it becomes very swollen before filling the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in this case is to open the patient's mouth and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see that the abscess is of a dark or black color, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch that part.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is declined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you should put the onion in it, and insert a thin probe into it, and incise it from all parts; and if pus comes out during your operation, then pause above the wound with a triple cloth, so that it does not come out.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have completed it, until it is washed with warm water and salt; and cure that other cause according to the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of abscesses from the armpits and those that are in the groin and the other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess occurs in the groin, they are glands that resemble softness, which are deformed and are called armpits, which when you cure them with that which we have said in the division and is not healed, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, and little pain, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron because of the discharge of pus; instead, let it remain inside until it is ripe, and then either you will break it or it will break by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, red, and the root of it is thin, then that one should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation in it is that you consider, giving your operation, whether the abscess of it has recovered completely or if it has diminished somewhat; and then make a serer on the patient, and the head of it should be in your hand, and open the mouth of it, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of it left with the instrument, which is a very noble instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or aram, and thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press against that tongue and it shows you the abscess, then cut over that lesion, and take an onion and place it in the wound, and pull it apart as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing you should pull out from the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument of this form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, but the outer parts of which are curved, so that the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, because they are sharp, and should be made of iron and thin.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then cut it with a knife of this form: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have cut one vein, cut the other according to this method of incision, and then guard the patient from any further wetting.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is bleeding from the wound, apply a solution of tannic acid or walnut shells and similar to the causes that stop the flow of blood, and then cure it within that time.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Some wounds in the groin may become other abscesses or those two boils, and incise those that I said at the beginning of two honey equalments.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	You have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in her groin, the abscess tended to a brown color, with little pain, which had already closed her groin, and the woman was breathing straight meat, and had already prohibited eating and drinking water, and had reached death if more time passed for one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The abscess had already become so large that it had half a dozen holes between two ribs.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, you should carefully puncture and insert it into one of its openings, and remove that, and then pour out a large portion from there, and then carefully incise the other wound, and close the mouth of the abscess, and cover its tongue, and then carefully insert the bone into that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then remove a large piece of it, not all of it but a few small pieces.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	And then apply the appropriate remedy to that wound, and immediately start applying warm water, and soon after apply ointment, and do not stop incising into that abscess with a sharp instrument for a long time, and another abscess will appear in its place, which should be incised as soon as it appears.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	And then apply a bandage and cauterize the wound with a pointed instrument, and thus stop the bleeding; and then walk around and do not ask what God has done to that person.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of incising an abscess when it is formed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh is formed in the abscess, and it is long, then it is not named perpendicularly; and if it is in the thick and round part, then it is called a bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it is cured with the remedy that we mentioned in the division, and you do not compare your treatment, and if after the abscess has been cauterized and becomes thin, then cover that which is added round; and if it is at a certain length, and is bloody, of a dark color or black, and not at the center, then cover the incision of it, because in that place there is fear for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that second hand which I have mentioned as white and long, you should make the patient lie down and take their tongue with an instrument that shapes it and place the nail on the new one, and pull that one down and insert it into one of the two instruments which are called in the introduction of two needles.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And do not insert it unless it is adjusted to the natural term of its addition, because if you insert it more, you will cause him to lose his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And when you have inserted it, use that which we have recommended in the introduction of two needles, and cure it while it is still unhealed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the insertion of it, use an engine in the cauterization of it, and the handle of the cautery in his hand should not be anything but sharp water, and you should place the cap of the patient's head on your own, and take the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned, and take some of the water which we have mentioned in the title of cauterization, and comfort it as a living cause, and do not make it too thin or subtle, and from that fill the hollow of the instrument which is in this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The patient's abdomen is supported with a cushion like the cavity of a mortar, and the medical instrument is placed on the wound, and the patient leans on their side to prevent saliva or drool from falling from their mouth due to the intrinsic medicine, so that no such cause falls on the patient's clothing and that the patient does not suffer from it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And place your hand on the medical instrument and press it against the uvula for a certain time until it becomes discolored and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around that [the uvula] and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray through a tube into which the cloth adheres, and do this as many times as you want until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and leave it there for three days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and after the cauterization, wipe around the uvula with a cloth dampened in the medicine, and change that which is in the circle of the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and treat it with warm compresses until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is considered more dangerous at the beginning and longer in duration.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some wounds are cured with this method that is more subtle than cauterization, which is cured by means of sublimation in this manner: take chamomile, yarrow, origanum, rue, scudaded Arabic gum, camomile, borage, and similar herbs to those of the plants, and adjust all these causes or some of them in a bowl, and they should be submerged in very hot water and boiled; and the bowl should be well washed with decent water, and there should be a trough above the bowl where an instrument made of copper according to this method is placed; it can be made of silver or copper.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the tip should be inserted into the patient's mouth until the steam reaches the uvula on the back of the throat, until the uvula is slightly obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat this treatment on those wounds until they dry, and be careful not to do this treatment at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, because it would too much adjust in the abscess, and do not let you do that, but leave the declaration of the abscess to the doctor.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument present, then take a rod and place a piece of wood on the outside of it, to prevent the patient's mouth from being smoked, because the wooden plug prevents the smoke from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of thorns and of that which sticks to the sole and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Thorns or other objects stick to the sole of the foot.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then cover that which you are about to remove, with the gaze, so that you do not touch it with your tongue or any other instrument, so that it is declared what is in the sole.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the sole, cover it with the gaze, so that you make the patient vomit, so that the food is removed from the stomach, because often the cause attached to the sole is removed by vomit; or that the patient swallows a small piece of bread or a rag of linen or a bowl of dry bread; or take a sponge and soak it with salt water, and place it firmly on the patient's mouth, because as the sponge absorbs in the place where thorns and are removed, they are also removed.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And then take an eel and boil it with bread, and remove the bones and skin; or take a pig and boil it with bread, and remove the bones and skin.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If you do not forget those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be as thick as a small one, and in its removal, place the cavity that you insert into the patient's mouth to facilitate.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And the aga is lifted up in sus, and guard yourself that the touch of his jawbone of the neck, so that it does not occur to him this and that which he puts into the bone or the spine, or that which the doctor puts on his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But if the patient enters the instrument himself, because of his knowledge of the location of the cause annexed and puts it into the bottom, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the quantity that is prepared in him before he forgets.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of extraction of blood attached to the gallbladder.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the gallbladder blood is treated as we mentioned in the division of the cure of medicines and not with comforts, consider in the gallbladder of the patient at noon, since you have understood the language of the instrument that you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the gallbladder blood, extract it with a small or precisely handled instrument.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to remove that, take a concave canula and insert it into the gallbladder of the patient, and place your hand on the concavity of the canula, with a lighted iron, and do this as many times (until the gallbladder blood is dead and stays out of the gallbladder) and keep the patient away from all water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a full bucket of water and wash the mouth of the patient with that, and do not let any of that water enter the patient's mouth for an hour, then bring another with their hand, because the gallbladder blood is already like the water cools.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If the recommended remedy has not been forgotten, then smoke the patient with camomile or assafetida using the instrument we have recommended for smoking in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do that, in four ways.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another way of operation in suffumigation of that is to take an open container with burning charcoal and cover it with a cloth in the middle of which there is a tube, and place the end of the instrument in that tube; then remove the smoke; and place the patient's mouth on the end of the canula, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not lost until you know that the suffumigation has reached the lungs, which are the most important.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if not, then repeat the suffumigation more often, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salted and other foods, and not drinking water, and if necessary this regimen should be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument used to treat hernia when it is visible; and it is similar to forceps with sometimes, except that it has some curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed on the hernia, and its end resembles the beak of a heron, which grasps, in which it is rubbed with a file, so that when it grasps any cause, it does not leave it.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the speech on the detection and cutting of abscesses.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are special masses, of various shapes, according to the remembrance of them, of each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are different in puncturing and cutting of them according to various methods, one of which is for the special type of abscess that is filled with pus; and because of this, they can understand about the moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the places where the abscess occurs on the body, such as the abscess on the head is different from the abscess in the buttocks; and the abscess in the flesh is different from the abscess in the joint; and each of them has a specific operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And more about abscesses, some of which are such that they should not be pierced until their maturation is near or complete.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses, which are such that they should be pierced when they are ready, and not before their maturation is complete, just like abscesses that are near joints, an abscess that approaches a joint should be pierced before it reaches the area around it, and often the tendons or nerves of that joint are corrupted, so that it causes contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is matured, it will cause damage to the principal member; or it is near the anus, therefore pierce that unmatured one; and do not pierce it while it is not fully ready for digestion, but the one that is near the anus, so that it does not cause harm to the surrounding area and is extended to the parts of the anus, and it should be made a fistula, or it should be done in the term of the abscess that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When you know the right time for the puncture of the abscess, that is when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is ripe when the swelling of the pain and the cessation of fever, and the decrease in headache and pulse, and the increase in the hardness of the abscess, and other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you know that the puncture should be made in the place where the abscess is closest to the surface and where the pus comes from the highest part.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The puncture should be made quickly through the long bones of the body or the trunk, if the abscesses are in the joints of the arms or legs, and in the locations of the tendons of the nerves, of the arches; and at the back, in all equal locations where reflection does not occur; because in those that reflect, use puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in fleshy places, it is customarily said that you should not make the puncture until after the digestion of the abscess according to the following complement; because if you puncture it at that time, the duration of the disease of the poor man is prolonged, and very badly affects his mouth, and the depth of the abscess.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	When abscesses are perforated according to the size of the flesh or the need, or according to what the member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And when you administer small punctures, and in large abscesses, a large and wide section according to the difference in size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses where you should know that the incision should be made in the cavity and incised, when it is done as if you are cutting bread and making a slice, as in the case of those that occur in the armpits and groin.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that have incisions with three angles; and of those that are made as if you are cutting a sword blade, as in the case of the abscesses of the armpits.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those that are administered round and crescent-shaped incisions, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	When the one who does not have any such thing as superficial abscesses, you should make that shallow puncture, or just flat.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, do not be afraid to pierce it, as it may cause the entire body to burst in that hour; having removed a part of it, and the next day introduce another part, and remove a larger part, and do this gradually until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is very weak, or pregnant, or a small child, or elderly and in decline, as the animal spirit becomes more vulnerable at the exit of the pus, and the patient may die, and you should perform these operations.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be very careful with this chapter and your puncture in which you pierce these abscesses, as it should remove the infection and consider whether the infection of the abscess is few, or a flat section, then you administer the appropriate medicines for it or against it; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the puncture are deep, then you should wait to move them until they meet.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if a piece of the tendon or a part of it is removed from the abscess or hollowed out in that area, then cover it with a piece of old or new cloth made of fabric, as when you have treated wounds or sores, their moisture; and strengthen that by the third day; and then proceed to treat that and cure the same with the juice that comes from the wound until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	And if blood flow occurs during the operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar in which a cloth of linen has been soaked, and place that over the location where the bleeding is occurring.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if the blood flow persists, then cover it with a remedy and cure as has been recommended in various places of this our book and of division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	And if it is in the winter time, and the location of the abscess is near nerves, then cover it with powders made of vinegar and oil cauteric, and place those on the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the wounds are fleshy, then make sure to apply powders mixed with water and oil or vinegar and oil, and all of this should be done before the next clean day, as we have said, and then remove the abscess and clean that area and administer in the care of it whatever is appropriate for it within the time it becomes healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses generally, but according to the method of distinction that has already been said about all types of abscess and their treatment specifically by chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	About the incision of abscesses that occur in the neck
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	Small abscesses in the neck, and especially those that contain tunic-like substances that are their own; and their species are as follows.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And some of them are sharp, and those that contain moisture similar to honey.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And some of them contain moisture similar to honey and pollen, and those that are like their own; and some of them are stone-like, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In the section of all, and in the extraction of those, one does not fear, as it should not create resistance during the extraction of those.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	In the operation in the section of those, you should use an instrument in the shape of which you can approach it, which is called a hook, as long as you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If that which contains is moisture, then cut that section according to its length, and on the surface in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin at the section of the line B until the line G. Then, as moisture is evacuated, you should scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, because too many returned, if there is any cause of it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then submerge it in Egyptian gum, if present, and otherwise, in water and salt; and fill that place and leave it for another day, because that which is of that layer is corroded by that.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeat the second application of the Egyptian remedy thoroughly and cleanly if necessary, until you are confident that there is no cause for that rash; then cure the ailment with the remedy until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you should incise it in this way:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a sharp cut, in the shape of a crochet, and then insert between two lips of the incision and scrape that from all parts, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your surgical instruments cause resistance, then do what I have told you first of all.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Similarly, apply the remedy for healing and treatment as we have told you; incision over the pus-filled abscess is less painful, because it is of few scars and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some people have such abscesses in the head that they are never moist; the cause is that when you incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and then squeeze it like a deaf stone, rough, white, which cannot be washed, and if anyone touches it, it will cause pain.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other head abscesses in the head or this is not this chapter, as the abscesses that come to the heads of children and must be explained by the reasons of the gold, but the section of all these is a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the incision of those from the lowest part of them so that the health of the body is not affected by the lowest parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat them with what is appropriate for that of treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofulous glands that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses occur in the neck and in the armpits and in the elbows; and some occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and those that are generated between them, and all scrofula of those is within their own tunic, and as in the nodes and abscess of the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The specific types of these scrophulas are boils, some of which are stony, and some of which contain moisture, and some of which are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you have seen in good position in the Tumor, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the coda, and is mauve throughout, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the ribs, and is not pronged, so that you incise that one from the dry surface of the part above the part below the line of .G. within the line of .B., and score that one throughout, and extend two tongues of the coda to the nipple, or to the motz nipples if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that small one by one.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	It is more caution that the vein or nerve is not incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the space not be sharp, so that it does not adjust your hand to the incision, or disturb the patient, and that you do not incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you had incised a vein or ribs and prohibited your operation, then pause in the wound with three-pronged forceps or other powders which remain fluid of sanc, and clean the wound, and leave that inside which has paused the acuity of the abscess and is softening the wound and is beginning to be poyrida.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the tumor is removed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation before you complete it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if there is any cause for other small abscesses, then open those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large abscess, do not open that abscess from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you close it with a strong and durable stitch, let it fall out by itself if it is not causing harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cotton that you have already submerged in Egyptian oil, and then care for that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you open the entire abscess, then close the two lips of the wound and apply a poultice as soon as possible so that there is no remaining excess.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is still excess because of the size of the abscess, then open its root and drain it, and administer sutures and that which is called.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And in the case of scrofula that contains moisture, make a superficial puncture here where it appears to be maturing on your hand, and pause the puncture of that which is at the bottom of the chest, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the puncture, using a similar instrument and remedies, to eradicate that which has been removed from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound is already cleaned, then cure that wound with a generated piece of flesh before it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the drying of the core of an accidental abscess within the thigh.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients called this section in the hip, and I have not seen any man in our land who has made that incision.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of their speech.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men who have a bent knee, the incision should be avoided in order to extract the hip joint, as it would not be done properly for fear of all the veins and the main parts of the body being affected.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have boils in the mouth or throat or two tonsils, when the patient is not in a coma, use the section of the epiploon to prevent death, which is done by puncturing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when you want to do this, cut the epiploon into three or four small sections of the epiploon, depending on the size between two circles for quantity, which is in the cavity, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for sectioning, which is private from flesh and the vessels of sinew of which are soft.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is afraid, then extend the tongue of the throat outward, and then cut the tongue until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of sinew if possible from those causes.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the lip second, as recommended; and it is indicated over the section of the canal through the flap which is of that eye which is from there and for the disruption of the lip and for the abscess of the mouth.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Let the wound be left open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Since the hour has come when this puncture is feared, add two strips of bandage to the wound, and leave it alone with the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that do not harm the flesh until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the summary of the sermon we have recommended is nothing more than that the physician should open the abscess as soon as possible, and the patient dies from this, and the physician opens his mouth, and they incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the area of the wound for some time, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that reason, the wound should remain open until the evil of the patient is consumed; and this evil lasts for three days; and therefore, in that case, the physician should leave the wound like this, and cure it within the time it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant held a spoon in the patient's mouth and punctured a part of the lung canal, and he was called to its cure, and immediately the breath returned as it does in the breath of the dying, and the wound was discovered and the blood that was in the wound was removed.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, it was found that there was no incision of the vein or guide, and the wind was from the wound, and the wound was healed with fire.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if the servant does not recover in the foot, and then return to the better position of his arrangements.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the epiploon there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	About the section over the abscess that occurs in the groin, and it is called groin hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called groin hernia is an abscess of the second color of the body, and it is caused by the women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is of two kinds, either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one there is no cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is of two kinds, one of which is similar to large nodes, and the other kind is similar to an abscess that is caused by the rupture of an artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not allow him to make pressure on it with iron unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine that part and investigate whether it resembles a hard knot, and if it is not suspended from any of the veins, then insert that which is there like a node, and extract that which contains the bone and bursa; otherwise, thoroughly examine its entire condition, and apply treatment with what will cure it before it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the separation of the kinds of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the different kinds of nodes that I have already mentioned in their division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And do not allow him to make a doubt between a node and an abscess when you count it as such.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So you say that an abscess is heat and fever and severe pain until the boiling of the superfluous substance is calmed; and it is a complete putrefaction that ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a node does not have heat or fever or pain, and it contains that which is called the lion's tail, which is in the swollen sac itself.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And if the color of the body is second, and its beginning is like a swelling and is made thus, whether larger or smaller, and it belongs to two species, because it contains fat and moisture, and the colors of moisture are mottled, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Then, when you reach the cure of the node, remove that and inquire about that which begins to protrude at the beginning of the instrument called the intrames, according to its form, which is as follows.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is necessary to inquire about the abscesses and all the nodes, and you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid place that you find in the abscess, and you rotate the tips of this instrument little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the codena.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then place your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and remove the intrames and consider what is found in its traces.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current moisture is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you insert it into the dry section according to what I said in the other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is no moisture on the footprints of the entrance, then it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And if it is dry on the surface, it has the shape of a crocodile according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you were taught, suspend that arm, and exorcise the vein from all parts to facilitate, and keep the cloth or bag over that and remove the blood from the wound.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to remove that blood, and you should wait for that until it stops flowing without any cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If it continues to flow too much or too little, the wound returns to its original state.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some small part of it is still flowing, then apply a layer of some corrosive powders and strengthen the layer, and place your hand over the area where the abscess is, and cure that from the other cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the wound is large, then you should cut the two lips of it and cure that from that which contains.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the pulse is opposite or not, then you should cover and fill the place with a bandage that is made of vinegar and linen, leaving it for two days or three until the pain subsides and the inflammation of the sinus stops; and then return to incising that which remains of the swelling.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the instruments necessary for incision and puncture.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those that have the forms of probes, and of three kinds, one being large, one medium, and one small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large probe is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium probe is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small probe is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, of awl, and of the rounded ends of the instruments, in order that the instrument may not be injured by the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the puncturing instruments, and they are named albed and one of them is called bers.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And of three spices, one of which is great, pepper and salt.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The shape of the great spice, the shape of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The shape of the pepper, the shape of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of the salt, the shape of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is convenient for those abscesses and wounds and fistulas and boils that between them are of the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they make needles, large, lions, such as great golden needles with which the shuttles are sewn, and they are made of copper, or of iron, or of silver, And the best when they are made of copper.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they make the spices of black pitch, which are like those that for them are opened the fistulas in the cavity of which are reflections, that are reflected by their levity on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of three spices, one of which is long, and the others are pepper, and the others are short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The shape of a large swelling:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The shape of a small swelling:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The shape of a tiny swelling:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the fingers are of special types, which are simple joints, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And there are also knuckles, and there are three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among those, there are joints with two curves, and there are three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among those, there are joints with three curves, and there are three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The shape of a large simple joint, the form of which is:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The shape of a small simple joint:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a medium-sized simple joint, the form of which is:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The shape of a large knuckle:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The shape of a small knuckle, the form of which is:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a medium-sized knuckle, the form of which is:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a great oak tree with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a great oak tree with two bends:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a great oak tree with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a great oak tree with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a great oak tree with three bends:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a great oak tree with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the shapes of the sharp and sharp scalpels that cut and scrape the nodes and abscesses, and there are three kinds, one of which is large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of a medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The edges of those that are made by cutting are sharp, and the other edges are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a way, but rather so that it can be done well in the excoriation of nodes, to avoid injury to the beginning of a vein or nerve, and for those it is cured for the patient and also quietness a little for the adjustment of which is the excoriation of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of amulets, and there are three species: large, medium, and small, as you see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large amulet:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of the medium amulet:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of the small amulet:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	These are made of wax and are similar to the rays of the sun, which is made into an alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is on the outside where the pointed star is hidden and in that place, when you want, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of stars, which are hidden among the mentioned ones for the puncture of abscesses and do not pierce the wounds, and there are three species: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of those which are cut off from the flow of blood, and there are three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of which:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	These are made of wax and are round with a certain length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should have large, thin, and few of these special types of bandages, because in order to remove those abscesses with speed in necessity, and when the first and primary medicine is not enough.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use these to lance abscesses in all parts of the body, and only use them in fleshy places, such as on the thighs, arms, breasts, belly, and testicles, and similar to their fleshy abscesses.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some bandages are made from those other tools, similar to small scissors, according to this form; by which the abscess is lanced when it is done by lithotomy, or when you need to enter a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some bandages are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	About the treatment of men's breasts, which are similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some women inflate their breasts to compliment the fact that they are losing weight, and then they inflate their breasts, assemble their breasts like those of women, and they are far from being men.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to those who have that, cut those areas in the shape of a crescent moon, from line B to line G, and then excoriate the entire scab, and place the plaster of flesh-colored medicament on it, and adjust the two lips of the plaster with cotton, and cure that before it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines to the parts below and is softened by its size as if it were a woman's, then cut it in two at the most elevated part, into two sections similar to crescent moon shapes, each of which should contain the other, within the line that the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line B and G. And then excoriate the cord that is between two lips of the plaster, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary in the healing before it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the initial step of inserting a needle into the patient's skin due to their unease or due to blood flow, then cover the affected area with a plaster submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it in place until it begins to fester, and then cure that area which is infected.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the puncturing of abscesses that come from the breasts.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from the breasts are of the species of scrofula, hard lumps, which contain a pus pocket.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain moisture, some are to be punctured with a dry moon-shaped needle: from the line G to the line B. And as soon as all the contents of the abscess have been evacuated, then you should complete the wound and leave it open until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And as soon as the wound has healed, it should be treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the lymph nodes, and of the scrofulous glands, is present, then you should incise it as we have mentioned in the section on scrofulous glands equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague has spread to an area that cannot be reached, then apply the cautery as we have mentioned in the previous section.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Section on the incision of abscesses that occur due to injury or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an injury occurs and the wound is healing over it, then abscesses and signs such as inflammation and abscess occur due to the artery or vein: because when an abscess occurs due to injury, it is longer attached to the chest; and that when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a crackling sound.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And those that occur due to vein are located at the back of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And incision of this abscess is wrong, and especially in those that are behind the shoulders, and in the angles, and in the back, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, therefore avoid incising it, and that which is on the outside, or on the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	May you place above the one that is theirs due to inflammation of the orifice of the arch, cut through the dry section in the long; and approach the section with tweezers and approach the arch, and remove the tunics within which it is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And approach that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and clean the arch with a sharp double edge in two places, — which causes you to have seen in extraction of two arches that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And approach the place between two ligaments with a space in which it is entirely in, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And approach the administration of treatment in which pus is generated before the ligaments fall; and cure that with suitable remedies to that before it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is by section of the vein, then cover that you have your hand above that which is at your possible from the abscess to the section, and approach the needle after the place you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread before you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess according to what I have told you in the vein of grape4 of two parts of two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that the thread will come out, then insert the needle at the beginning of the abscess and strengthen the threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess at its lowest point before the pus inside is removed, and then insert the needle into the excess of the thread, leaving what is left in place.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place a compress soaked in vinegar and oil over the area, and then administer the cure that is made with cloths and tinctures until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, an abscess occurs in the arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when it occurs due to their compression or excessive work, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is done in the places of assistants or the ankle, or in any place where the joints are painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	When the abscess is large and resembles the color of the other body, and it is in the major parts of the patient's body, and when it is stretched with great force, the patient feels a sudden shock.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And the abscess is not attached to the front of the body, and for this reason it is left alone, and it is bruised at all parts and does not go to the front or back parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those who are in the joints should not be pricked with iron, because it could cause a contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But those who are in the head or forehead, let the needle be left alone.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if the abscess is small, then use those tools and cut that from the root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with a ligature, and scrape that, and remove that; and place the bandage on it, and cure it within the time that it becomes healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the lancing of an abscess that occurs in the cheek and also in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	When some men have moles in their abdomen and other parts of the body, which are called fungal due to their similarity to those that function as mushrooms, and the reason for this is subtle, and the head of these is large; and already their lips are converted, and they are from those that are small, and they are from those that are very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in his abdomen there were two parts which were more like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those that are white, of less reason.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already their lips were inverted and they opened, and moisture was running from there all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I inserted these and again in one foot 18 lines and the other 6 lines.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the beginning of their insertion is that you consider if the patient is wet, and the color of the skin is white, wet, of subtle reason; then you insert it with a thin needle, and keep it in your presence, and heat the cautery in the fire, because the moles that cause section of these must be expelled by burning; and if you find the burnt part, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If the patient is feeling pain and fear, keep a sharp sword away from them; instead, take a recent splinter, strengthen that arm, which we have mentioned, and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust in the stricture of the splinter; therefore, do not stop strengthening the large wound in the arm until it is abscised and falls off by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	However, if the arm is of large size, there may be some cause for fear and pain, especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	However, it is possible that you incise the wound of the arm, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then care for it until it is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to incise the arm that is of dark color, of little sensation, and regularly shaped, because that is cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And if you find any memory of cancer, remove it immediately.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 42
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the cure of an elevation of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	An elevation of the navel is caused by various causes; either by fissures in the umbilicus, which is on the abdomen, and through which the intestine or hernia can come out; or by a swelling that flows with blood or serum, as it is called; or by constricted ventosity.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is by fissure of the umbilicus and through protrusion of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the body; and the pain is severe, and appears in different positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is by protrusion of the intestine, then its position is similar to that which we have mentioned before, with greater diversity, and as you press on that part, which is called the abdomen, it becomes hidden, and return; and frequently it is accompanied by severe pain, and a great deal of effort is required to introduce it back.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is by moisture, then the pain is severe and does not disappear when you press on the abdomen, nor is it constricted or inflamed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is for pus, then apply these signs to the swollen part of the wound.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is for meat, then the pus is heavy, large and hard, and it forms a second quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is for moisture, then the touch of it is like lion's skin.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider whether the elevation of the navel is due to pus from an abscess or vein, or due to moisture; then you should avoid its treatment, because in that case there is fear and dread as you were taught in the chapter where he mentioned the abscesses from an abscess and a vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the elevation of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then you should command the patient to hold their own belly and stand still; and then carefully examine the entire navel circumference, and command that it be held between your hands on the belly, and carefully circle the spatula wide around the navel over the place where you have well placed the tent; and then extend the main part of the abscess to the parts above the ankle; and then carefully apply the fleam or the lancet and the method of cutting.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then take the lubricant that has been extended over the bandage and insert the mentioned instrument into that place and seek the intestine; and if you have not done so previously or guarded it through the bandage, then you extract the pus and push the intestine to the parts of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have taken off the bandage, then take that needle and remove the excess of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is against your incision or vein, then circle that thread, and return to your operation; and take two needles and place them in those two fields strongly and insert two needles around the abscess in a cross pattern, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and let the place where the flesh is extended and falls out; or insert that when it becomes thin and can be removed, and then care for that which covers the mouth with water until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the abdominal eminence is made of flesh and nothing else, or due to wetness, then cover the abscess with what we have said and break the pus or the wetness that is in it, and then cure that wound with a suitable remedy that covers and heals it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 44.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of the neck.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, of special cases of the neck and how to treat it with medicines, and that it is advisable to use iron in its treatment so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that the neck generates in the greatest and most careful treatment of it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that some neck tumors are in places where eradication is possible, such as the neck that is in the breasts or on the cushion and similar to the members allocated to stretch all of it, and especially when they begin small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, do not try to remove it yourself, because you cannot heal from that or I have not seen any other, nor that it has reached that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	When the operation is performed as we have said, you precede and leave the patient and purge them of black bile for some time, and then sign that, if it is found to be evident replacement.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation in which they should be located, and prohibit them from eating anything that could cause complications; and then examine all parts of the body thoroughly before starting the operation.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not stop it in the same way, and express the locations, and wipe away the blood completely with your hand or with an instrument that is as clean as possible from the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you have difficulty stopping the flow of blood from a vein or an artery, then cauterize that area while the bleeding is still flowing, and then care for that wound until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 44
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure of hydrocephalus.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the division, of the species of hydropathy with water, and the symptoms of each species, of its cure by medical treatments.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the one that is cured by iron is only the species of altitudes alone, and it is not approximated to iron for the species of temporists or the species of hypophysis, because it is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this species of hydropathy temporists with medical treatments and do not compare your treatment, consider whether the patient has been weakened, or if it is another illness of the same kind, such as coughs or stomach ailments and similar to those, then keep in mind that you should not treat it with iron, because fear is over it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient of great virtue, and it is not another illness but only hydropathy, and not in children or the elderly, then the method of the operation for it is that you raise the patient between your hands, and give them water to drink from the specific part behind the pecten, and then take a sponge in this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two sharp points long, with a sharp tip like a needle; but rather it should be in some shortness little by little, so that in the operation it does not pierce into the intestine, and that it does not harm that one.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of hydrocele is due to the intestines, because it is customarily said that you should make the incision along the belly for the length of three fingers behind, on the right side of it above the pubic bone.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydrocele is due to illness of the groin, then your incision should be on the left side of the belly for the length of three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of hydrocele is due to the testicles, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not make your incision on the side on which you wish to place the patient, so that the excess does not flow to that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce the entire cavity with the instrument, and then insert it into that incision, and raise your hand between the cavity and the abdomen, and you scrape that one; and if the quantity of an inch or about.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then approach the patient's mouth and insert the tube until it reaches the space where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or of fine gold, or of lion's hair, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two on one side and one on the other; and it is sharpened at the tip according to the manner of a pen, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end of which there is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, you can hold it over the instrument and then evacuate the water in small quantities, because if you evacuate too much at once, it could cause great harm to the patient due to the resolution of his animal spirit, or an accident could happen to him.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	You should evacuate the water according to the amount of virtue in it and according to what means for the patient's health, the condition of his body, and his goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and release the water that causes such pain, which is usually held by the catheter, which releases the tube that is on the tip of which you are advised to pierce that second in that way.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the process with the instrument on the other side if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small amount of water, and do this for several days, and be careful not to let too much water out.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	However, if you are afraid of causing harm to the patient and let out a large amount of water, then cure that part with burial in sand, and moisture in bath, and under the sun for a long time; and cure that part with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the melon and the leg as soon as you have completed the extraction of water, according to what I have previously said.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 5.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the cure of children who are born without a perforated urinary tract.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the children are born with their head outside of their mother's womb and the top of their skull is not perforated (or is straight or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then cover the head with a soft cloth as soon as it is born, according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And place a thin nail with a flat head on the misaligned skull and tie it for three days or fourteen days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when you want to urinate, remove it; and then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not place the flat head, the urine that passes over the area may not clean this cover.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Then the one who was misaligned should be treated with a flat nail, as we have said, for several days until it is straightened out.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Then those in which the misalignment is not in its place, the cause of this is that one who was born with his head outside of his mother's womb cannot urinate at the parts below, until the midwife raises the child to the parts above; and it is not at birth, because then the sperm cannot reach the mother according to its straightness, and it is a malady due to the position.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of operation in this case is that the patient should be lying on their back, and then extend the head of the bone of the patient with your left hand during forceful extraction, and insert the tip of the knife of the location of the periosteum sharply, as if writing with a pen, or do not cut any part, so that the edge of the bone of the patient resembles the tip of the knife and the blood falls into the wound after extraction.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation of phlebotomy, four things often go wrong with this; and pause at that point where you cut the vein, and cure the wound before it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 66
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the white substance that often occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the bone and corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the bone.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Four things often go wrong with this white substance on the bone and its prominence of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	No-malignant, cover it with a thin oil and cut open the one that contains all of those monsters; then place your hand over the area where the oil seeps in; and then apply the oil that is cured to heal the wound.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the malignant one is deep, cover it with a red cloth, then apply a pointed cautery at the beginning and end of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the malignant one is on the prepuce of the penis that has not been circumcised, and one part of it is inside the prepuce and the other part is deformed, then cover the one that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; and then heal the deformity, because when you heal it, the prepuce may not be safe from infection.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if there have been accidents in the genitalia and the black and curly prepuce, then cover everything that has already been discolored and that is about to be corrupted or that is already corrupted; and apply linens over that with a mixture of honey, which is pounded with wheat flour, and sorrel, and thistles, and cress.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure the other wound until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	However, if there is excessive bleeding, then administer the silver cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	where the pointed cautery is applied at two positions together, one to stop the bleeding and the other to the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corrupted and destroyed completely in an hour, then make sure to insert a catheter into the urethra to allow the patient to urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in those cases where the foreskin is known, and on which circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to inflammation or abscess) make sure to excoriate with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to dislodge those exquisitely, then make sure to excoriate with a spatula from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and apply some force when the foreskin is thin, as it is easily perforated by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then gently separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis with a fine needle, which is already prepared in the water soaked to prevent other infections from occurring.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then apply a styptic to stop the bleeding before it becomes consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the cleaning of children and the treatment of those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as in other plagues: nevertheless, since it is our operation and our will, and the latter is properly in children, it is necessary to assign them to a better operation and make them less likely to be lost to salvation.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision on any of the free men, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experience that the majority of craftsmen and barbers use circumcision and cleaning with a knife and a file; and they use a rope and a needle.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already tried all these methods and none has brought better relief than the use of forceps, or a string that can be used to pull out the foreskin, which is under two tunics, and then remove the tonica, and often it is necessary to start from another incision and cause certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the method used for circumcision, which is done by a pliers, and digital, of which blacksmiths use, is not safe for the incision of the end of the male member, because it often goes into its wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation, a nail, if it is sharp and rusty, will ruin your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The foreskin of the child is naturally short, and if it is stretched in such a way that it does not require circumcision, I have seen such cases.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	However, the best method of circumcision that I have seen, which is done with forceps, a string, and a needle, is to make an incision of equal size on both sides, so that the sharpness above is the same as the sharpness below; and since your hand is proportioned to two sharpnesses, and the incision is made in one step; and it is a compression of the foreskin in the shape containing the foreskin of the penis, which does not make any mistake at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The first step of the operation is that you make the child comfortable, especially if it is one of those who understands a little, so do not do anything else but hold him firmly in your arms until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then make every effort to cheer him up as much as possible in that position where he receives your understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Then make sure he is between your arms, well prepared and not naked; hide the forceps in your hand or behind his back, so that the child does not see those or any other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then place your hand on his back and blow into the mouth, and pull out the one that is sitting at the top of his back, and modify that which is added to it from deafness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then tie the location that is indicated by your strong hand, and then pull up slightly below that, the second thread, and then pull the thread through the first thread and place it behind the good retention, and insert between two threads.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the neck slightly and straighten the head; and then gently and gradually apply leeches, which is better; and place powder on top of the powder and cloth in which is spread mugwort oil in a mixture with recent rose oil; and let that be placed on the other side; and cure it with that cure until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	This is the shape of the forceps for extraction:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The one end of the forceps should not be sharp and the other end should be sharp, so that it does not damage the root of the tooth, and the length of the two blades should be equal to the length of two handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in extraction is that too much force is used to lift the entire or part of the neck from the beginning.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you should extend that of your hour from the beginning and insert it into the abscess at the same depth.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a hook and insert it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If they have passed three days, and it is swollen more than the skin allows, then let that go into the apostema carefully, and scrape that area gently, and index that second which you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the skin, so it does not touch that area.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And heal that area with the powders that we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is indexed too deeply, and you observe the parts above, that area does not need to be treated.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And heal that area until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter lviii.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or a narrowed urethra, or a tumor, or flesh, and similar to those that we have mentioned about the methods of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and you see retention of it due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then lie the patient on their back.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the feet of that person on their own back and extend their abdomen from the lower part of their back, and tightly press their abdomen as much as possible towards the area where the stone is.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is pressed to expel the stone towards the back parts, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if that water is not dissolved and is done forcefully, then make the cause over the patient, so that you administer extraction of it with an instrument called a catheter, which is in this form: It is made of silver and has a fine lion's head, like a pen needle, at the end of which is a thin needle.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way to extract the urine for that person is to take the thin end and tie it with wool or thread for good hold; then insert the tips of the thin end in the back part of the catheter, and if there are any superfluous causes of the wool, do not introduce them into the catheter with force. Then suck the urine from the border and the album of the bladder.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And place the patient on a bed, rub their body with a warm cloth and oil it with olive oil and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And gently insert the catheter to facilitate its passage until it reaches the tip of the urethra; then bend the catheter over to the side of the belly; and gently push the catheter into that opening, and another one into the bladder, so that the patient can urinate, and if this order is not followed correctly, it may cause harm.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And gradually extend the catheter to the tip of the urethra, where the urine will collect on the thread.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And remove that catheter and perform the procedure to drain the urine, using a catheter, do not stop doing this until the bladder is empty and the patient is relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 99.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of catheterization of the bladder using a cystoscope and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or it is congealed in that place, or it is constricted by inflammation, and you want to drain fluids and medications from that place, then use the instrument called the cystoscope, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but its tip is blunt, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that place there are three parts: two from one side, as often.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning is a cavity, in which that substance is placed, and as much as it holds, is added, until when any cause is drawn from that place, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled, that substance is drawn out, and when it is pulled out long, according to what the clampcedra does in the battles of sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to drain fluids from the bladder, insert the tip of the clampcedra into the liquid, and draw out that substance which is placed in the parts above, because the liquid is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then introduce the catheter made of stone into the urethra as we recommended in the circle; and then apply moisture to that, which moisture will pass through to the bladder almost immediately, and the patient will feel it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the thin needle that is used when the bladder is punctured, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or copper, of which the tip is similar to a small feather, and then the canal is inserted into it.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder and place it in the moisture that you want to puncture in the bladder, and then tie it strongly with a double thread, and boil that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then introduce the tip of the needle into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand on the bladder with the moisture that has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not see the bladder, then take a glass and make a circle from it; and perforate that completely through its thickness; and then insert a strong thread in those places, as if it were rolled up; and then add the circle where it is also attached, more than you pause in that water that you want to use for the moisture, and smell and taste.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then bring that instrument near to him and do as you have done with the bladder, and express the moisture from the bladder into your hand.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed the different types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones that form in the kidneys and stones that form in the bladder, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical operation and incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone that forms in the bladder itself is the one that remains in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will tell you about those that are exposed and shortened.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it is said that stones formed in the bladder mainly occur in children; and among its symptoms is that the urine that is excreted from the bladder is like water in its thinness, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels pain in their lower back, and they are treated with those remedies.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is the cure of children who have reached fourteen years old; and it is difficult to treat in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In young people, it is considered for that reason.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that one whose stone is larger and treatment is more difficult; And if it is less, it is opposed to that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we reach the treatment of that one, cut at the beginning of that which cripples the patient, who extracts all the wound which is in his intestines; because that wound sometimes prevents the entrance of the stone due to its inspection of him.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then press the patient's feet and be steady and strong in order that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it falls out of some other place.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then make that incision between your fingers prepared, and the muscles of him should be left under the things of him, in order that the bladder is entirely made inclined to the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then remove all of that wound.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel a stone in the space, then immediately make a quick incision over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you cannot remove all of the matter, then apply oil to the affected area with your left hand, if the patient is a child, or with your right hand if they are an adult, and insert that into their rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And then remove all of that stone.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually move it towards the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that with your hand, and expel it through the same incision where you made the cut.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant to extend his right hand over the area above, and his left hand to remain on the cord that is under the thighs, in the part of the body where the incision was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a sound with this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And divide that which is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle, but towards the left side of the cushion; and let the section be over the stone, and let the section be made on the stone, and let there be a transverse section, so that the section is wide enough and narrow enough according to the quantity that the stone allows, and not too much, because the stone easily damages the part that is on the stone, and it is forgotten due to its difficulties.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is a stone from which the angle and margin are sharp, so that the insertion of it is difficult for that.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that which is like a lion's claw, and it is round, and it is made of the same material and insertion.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is that which has sharp angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not forgotten, then carefully place it over that, or gently press it on that with a tool that has a sharp end, which is like a file, and does not slip from it; or insert a subtle instrument with a curved end behind it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do it on that one, then expand the wound slightly, and if you want to stop bleeding, cut into it strongly with a three-faced vitriol tripod.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is larger than one, then at first you push the hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then incise it over it; and then insert a little water; and similarly do if they are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is known that you incise that great section, which causes the patient one of two causes: either they die or they develop a continuous stream of urine, because the place is not entirely solid.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	If you administer expulsion of it before it is completely forgotten, or if you use the forceps in the fracture of it, enter through the teeth until it is extracted.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and press that one.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place a cloth soaked in oil or oiled and wet with water on it, to prevent the abscess from spreading.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then gently lay the patient on their back, and do not pull the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when those days have passed, warm the area with water and oil, and cure it with the ointment of finicon and the ointment of diabazilicon until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	However, if in the same place an abscess occurs that is hard and corrosive, and if it is similar to the one that is in the bladder frozen, and if it is prohibited by the urine (and that is known as the exit of the bladder with urine), then introduce the said thing into the bladder and extract that pus, because it can cause the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the area with warm water and salt, and with whatever is appropriate, with the solution that is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover all the hours of the patient's care, approach their bed and adjust the medications placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the bladder, and it is stuck there, and urine excretion is prohibited, then cure that which you have recommended to reach the state of dryness, because too many troops are used for this treatment and it is known as dryness; and already I have extracted it, and it is your task to take a piercer made of iron with a sharp point, of which this is its form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extraction, sharp, stuck in the handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a thin thread, and tie that bladder behind the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the bladder, piercing it until the piercer reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then rotate the piercer with your hand in that small stone little by little, and you pierce its opening until you make that from the other side penetrate; because the urine is immediately released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then place your hand on that which is protruding from the stone of the part of the body where the verge is, which is soaked in water and is forced out by urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	However, if this cure is not applicable to you for some reason that prevents it from being done, then place two cloths on either side of the stone and two cloths above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then press on the stone in that part of the body between two ribs.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then remove the membrane and clean the wound, which is done in the place.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to place a cloth on the stone, but rather so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other cloth above should not be placed there, because when the cloth is removed from the stone, the codex returns to its place and covers the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that reason, when you have placed the cloth above, you must raise the codex to the parts above, or return it to its original place and cover the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Extraction of a stone from the female bladder.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	However, if you see a stone in one of those, its treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden by too many hands.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman has strong sexual desires.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who knows how to describe if the doctor is chaste, or has had many marriages.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not have a woman who knows this art, especially the operation itself.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location for incision over the stone in women is longer than the location of the stone, so it is necessary to make an incision beforehand, and in that place there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	However, if you need to do that, then make sure you get a wise and knowledgeable woman.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	However, if you are not able to find that, then seek out a skilled and cunning woman, or present a wise and experienced matron who has been involved in this matter, or a woman who has already participated in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then do that presently, and command the patient to do everything that you will order, from the examination of the stone until its removal; the reason for this is to determine whether the woman is a virgin, in which case cover your finger with the cloth and examine her anus.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If you find it there, cut it off from that place, and then command the patient to scrape it off.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert your finger into the patient's vagina and examine the stone, placing your left hand on the bladder, and carefully feel for it.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	If you find it there, gradually insert your finger into the opening of the bladder towards the parts below the symphysis pubis until it reaches the stone.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then scrape it off from the upper part of the vagina at any point where it is stopped and cut the stone into that part, and do not leave any part of the stone behind.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; and then enter the ray on that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity that you know how much the stone is from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you know that the types of stones are round: one of those is small and large, and lion and sharp, and long and round, and have hooks.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you know how many types there are of that for what you mean about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to remove the sand, adjust in that location for three hours and then return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you prepare with the tools that are called for in the extraction of stones in men, so that you will be helped by those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to remove the sand, and know that the expulsion of the sand is from the urethra that is incised, then you place powder on that location and strengthen that with a pulp and structure, and do not repeat that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because very likely the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Since the intensity of the pain decreases over several days, and the wound heals, then return to your operation before the stone is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision for hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia is not other than an accumulation of moisture in the white gut, which is the sac of the testicles containing the vessel, and it is called the vas deferens.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some veins are in the same membrane, which nature has prepared in the part of the vessel, before it becomes another vessel; and this is the sac of the testicles between the white gut, which we have said, and this is not other than a cord.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to the weakening of the testicles, so that this matter is accumulated in them, and sometimes it happens by a blow caused by the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has various colors, such as the color of it becomes yellowish or bloody, or red, or black, or white, or it is thin and watery, and this is the best one.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the symptoms by which one knows that this collection of water is of this kind: if it is in the white swelling that we have called, then the abscess will gradually decline in length, like the figure of an egg, and appear as a genet, because the moisture is from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper pancreas, then the abscess will gradually decline in parts, like the figure of an egg, and it is estimated that it is another egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the crown of the genitals and the white swelling, then it is estimated to be a hundred times worse.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you extract the color of the moisture from the abscess and measure it with a graduated glass; according to what is found in the footprints of the glass, judge of that which is contained in the glass.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, then you command the patient that they be flebotomized if it is possible, and sometimes see the blood of the patient.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And if it is necessary to place the patient in a supine position on their back for some reason, then place something under their buttocks.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then place yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the assistant to follow on their right, who extends their arm at an angle of one and a half spans from the groin to the partition of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a wide spatula and split open the groin from the middle towards the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And then make the incision straight and equally distant from the line that should be made on the thighs, until it reaches the white cartilage, including it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And then scrape that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not inscribe that; and your scraping should be the same as the one that is suspended above and subtly examined according to the amount possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then puncture the white cartilage with a wide needle and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between two labia of the section under the unciform, and extend the hook to the parts above; do not touch the cord that contains the genitals, and incise the hook in that manner that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And then incise that in its entirety or in parts, and more importantly its subtle layer, because if you do not examine the incision of it exquisitely, it is not secure that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the wound process of that part of its cord during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the hook, return to that, and then adjust the two labia of the cord of the genitals with a stitch, and then care for that as with the other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if the wound is corrupted by another illness, then cover it with what you have said that suspends it, and extract the wound, and then care for that as with what we have mentioned.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If water is added in two parts, equal amounts, then you know that two are hernias; if it is to your view that it is an operation, then do so.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you wipe the sweat, and enter into the sections with wool submerged in oil or rose oil; and place another piece of wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and expand it over two genetius and the navel of the belly; and place cloths and powders on top, and tie them with a bandage according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then place two cloths and fold them with wool according to this form; and make the ends like those that are pressed from the side or from wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the buckle of the boots, and the first one holds the buttocks inside the back, and the second one holds the part of the thigh, and two ends on top of two cushions and two other ends on top of two ankles, and all the structure should be adjusted in the buckle of the boots.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with a cautery instead of a section made with iron; and you should take a thin-bladed cautery and insert it into the groove of the ginatius, and ignite it after we have recommended that it be discovered before the white cipher containing the water, and then you take a cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that cipher, and ignite it before all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the cipher with your fingers, and scrape with your fingers, and scrape with a thin-bladed cautery ignited; and insert it according to what is possible inside you so that you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself from the heat that the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you should know that this operation is safer and longer than a section of the flank, and better than an operation with a knife.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you have resistance to an abscess at the time of section or at the time of cauterization, or flow of pus, then cover what resistance it causes to you for that, according to the cure that is appropriate to it, as soon as it is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is too weak, and does not want the second operation due to its horror, then administer anesthesia as I have recommended; and when you are certain that this hernia is incarcerated.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then make the patient lie on some elevated boards, approach the abscess in the lowest part of their back, and stop the incision according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And make the opening wide enough for all the pus to drain out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the area and hold it there, so that all the pus continues to drain out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for them until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is resistance to the drainage of the wound at that time, then you should not make an incision: because the white membrane in the orifice of the wound causes resistance and prevents the exit of the pus, then you should place a pen or instrument in the wound from which the pus is extracted, as shown; or adjust a small drainage tube on the pressure of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you will know that the water returns, and it is applied close to the months or environment of those; and when it is applied, then it should be pierced according to that manual method, which the patient has passed through her days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On incision over fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the incision of this hernia, there is great fear of losing the major dispositions; therefore, I see the dismissal of it and being saved by that better method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation in that and the species of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, say that the abscesses do not occur in those parts where the muscles are connected and it is done for various reasons: either due to excessive acute pain, which is poured into the muscles, or due to impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And its color is according to the color of the part, and it is not dark in pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	When the abscess is highly inflamed, its color is dark, and it does not hurt much.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some vaginal discharges are caused by the inflammation of the uterus, or by the inflammation of those parts that have already been pierced, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	This is known as the discharge of pus when it comes out with the thighs, and it does not hurt much.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	This is not discharged from the vagina due to any cause of compression on the thighs.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	It is possible to make incisions on this specific area and on other parts of the body; you should insert the needle of the genetius, and then lift up the skin above, and extract that white thread, and remove the suspensory ligaments of the veins, and tie them, and then insert the suspensory ligament where you have removed all the parts of the skin.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	If the skin has already been attached to those parts, then you should remove it and insert that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is adhesion due to some cause of the kidneys, or between those that are between the ribs, then you should remove all that adhesion and insert it at the beginning with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	However, if the flesh is native to the place of adhesion that is behind, then you should insert all of that which is there, and extract it as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with a piece of wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the cure of a hernia that is in the thigh.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The thigh is an abscess involuted by some swelling similar to a blister in softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to move and walk on the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this illness, there is fear for that which precedes it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, we must first perform the operation on that second part where they will make the first ones.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that you should place the patient on an elevated cushion; and then remove the suspensory ligaments of the testicles from their parts behind; and then remove the spermatic cord from its attachments to the abdomen, and extend it vigorously.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert the sharp, narrow needle through the cross section of the vessels where the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then extract all the parts that we have mentioned in the extraction of archery, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert a double-bladed needle in those places where the accident occurred, and another one at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert those needles in the middle of the section, and extract what has been added from the fetid and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then proceed to cure the pain with the remedies for other pains in which you wish to be able to generate healing by causing the vessels that would not otherwise be harmed by that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If it happens that you have access to all the basins, then cover them so that the testicles are removed or that the testicles for that reason become damaged by the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment from the beginning of the vessels, and that they are supported, or that something happens so that it is not harmfully affected.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure of internal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen from the sides of the miracle of the belly, so that some of the intestines can be pushed out through that rupture.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the abdomen or of excision of it, and these two species occur due to various causes: by impact, or by shaking, or by shouting, or by lifting a heavy cause, or by similar things.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	When the gout, due to its prolonged extension, occurs infrequently and not suddenly, it is as if the body is trying to contain the intestine within itself because the swelling of the joint compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	When the gout occurs due to the section of the joint, which causes sudden and intense pain; the abscess appears to be different from the usual one, and this is due to the intestine, and the condition of the patient is similar to the parts affected by the joint.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Sometimes the intestine is pushed out through the abdominal wall, and this condition is called an inguinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Sometimes the intestine is pushed out due to gas, and sometimes it moves within the abdominal cavity, where it is held, and this is a great inconvenience for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this disease, iron is used with caution, as it may cause harm to the stomach.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The method of the operation for that is that you command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with your hand at the parts near its cavity and obey his return, and then place it on his neck between your hands, and raise his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then tie the cord that is the cord of the testicles to the parts above, and insert the cord of the testicles completely through the long; and then place two needles in the second section where it would be necessary to open the section with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the second section is as much as possible that from there it has been cut off.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape that white flesh which is below the cord of the testicles, until it is exposed from each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you insert your finger in that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white flesh, which is below the cord of the cut, and between the white flesh second, and remove that adherence which is in the part behind the cut.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then bring the sheet under the testicles to the divided parts, and place the white cylinder on the left side of the sheet, and raise the hook on the right side to the part of the section; and command the assistant to extend the hook and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind after the solution is completed.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And then wrap the sheet around the testicles so that there is no cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white cylinder.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause, then place it on the abdomen behind.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle that is thick and made of iron, and insert it from the back of the white cylinder, which is the division of the testicles, the section; and insert its extremities into the four iron points, and place a cloth over them in the shape of a cross; and tie it to the white cylinder which we said was behind the division of the testicles with a strong rope of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then gently wrap the extremities of the feet and tie those with strong tape quickly, before any of the vessels that inflame them cannot be treated for fear of post-operative infection.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then place another piece of tape second from the first tape, long on both sides of the abdomen, which is left behind the scrotum, as much as the size of the testicles, and insert it all along the roundness, and remove it from there.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then insert it into the part behind the scrotum, cutting through the section that contains the seminal vessels and blood vessels as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer submerged wool in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the tape that we have recommended (and some white tape of the scrotum is cauterized, which we have said to avoid bleeding from the seminal vessels, because sometimes those tapes fall off).
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the patient's breathing is delayed, then apply a cold water enema and place your hand on the area where the second one will fall.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with the other remedy for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of inflammatory hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, no one has seen anything that can be cured with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that is alive; which is that you should tie the veins close to the section above the patient's bed; and then dry in the middle location around the pus that causes this, until the veins fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the dislocation that is made in the elbows.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some women have broken their elbows there as we have said, and indicate the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not give any cause for hernias in the groin; and if you do, it is rare; and return to it in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	However, if the time is prolonged, a fissure is adjusted in the groin before it is discovered in the groin; and this is done by the extension of the groin, which is as we have said, causing the groin to be stretched, and then it becomes soft, and the area becomes inflamed and swells.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure of it is with a pointed cautery as we have said before.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some wounds are cured with iron according to this method: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then the area of the abscess inflammation is cut through the width according to the amount of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then the white thread that is pulled through the opening before it is discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the rag and place it over the area of the groin inflammation, and press that on the belly button.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then bring the two prominent spots on the outer part of the thigh bone and adjust one of those sutures to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the thigh bone, and do not insert the needle from the thigh bone completely, nor extend the wound, nor any other cause that you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure that with the treatment of wounds, and as you insert the needles, clean that and restore the wound before it is consolidated; because the thigh bone contracts and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, because it is more likely to be beneficial.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the ligaments of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	The ligaments of the testicles are softened in some men by the fact that the tissues that are between them are softened, and the protection of it is lost.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is sought in the treatment of it that he makes the patient lie on his side, and inserts the entire ligament which is softened over the natural ligament; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, apply three or four stitches with softened thread at the beginning of the wound and make a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then insert between the stitches; and cure by treating the other wounds until they are healed and the wounds close.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause it is allowed to me to remember of it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember of it except for two reasons, one of which is that the doctor knows it when he is asked about it from someone who knows its cure; and the other reason is that we have had an ancient necessity for castration of other animals for our uses, such as horses, and mules, and pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore it is said that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by incision through the section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In that place where it is done for traction, the method of the operation is to make a cut on the animal's tail between its testicles, so that they soften and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those things with your hand inside before they are resolved and do not appear from the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In castration done by incision and division, hold the animal and take the scrotum of its testicles with your hand on the right side.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the suspensory ligaments, and incise on each side of the testicle through which two blood vessels pass.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise those that will be extracted from each side.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave any of them on the ones from the epididymis, but cut the thin one that is over the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This method of castration is better than the one done by traction, because traction leaves no cause of the testicles for the animal to want gout.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of hernias.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hernias in men occur in two ways: one is when it appears where the space is between the testicles, and the other is when it appears where two testicles are, with a bulge in that area.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes it contains urine, which is located between the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	And in women, there is a special type: it is that the bulge of the hernia over the pelvis is like two testicles of a man, but with a small amount of tissue at the opening where the penis of a man and two testicles are.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: one for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you should insert those fleshy parts adjusted inside so that the opening of that does not escape, and then cure those wounds with the treatment of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second special case of men, where urine is found in the sac surrounding the testicles, there is no treatment or operation in it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of lentils and meat that are prominent among the causes of women's illnesses.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Lentils are often adjusted according to natural causes until they become ripe and are cooked properly; and some women are magnified in certain ways before intercourse, as in men, and also during it.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, you should have the excess of lentils on your hand or in an urn and scraped off.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not end in the beginning, mainly at the edge of the wound, so that it does not become a source of pus.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then cure with that which is used for the treatment of wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Meat that is not cooked is meat that has been in the intestines of the main animal until it is filled with it, and it is often used as a remedy for certain parts of the body (and because of this, first they called it "bad gut"); therefore, you should scrape off such meat, as you would lentils, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is not perforated, or if it is small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to an illness that has preceded it, and the cause is made by meat not well cooked or by sharp or rough food.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made in the joint of the big toe, or in its sides, or in the most prominent part of it, or in the lowest part of it, and forbids movement, engagement, and standing up, and very strongly forbids menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made by regularly looking at the menstrual flow, if it is apparent, then do so; but if it is not apparent, then you should look for it in the thighs or in the vagina.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if menstrual flow is due to sharp or rough food, and it is directed towards the two labia, then you should cover and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And place your hand on both lower lips, and then press the indicated points to relieve the pain.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her legs extended, and then gently extend both lower lips until the thin phimosis is broken and the foreskin is exposed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it on the area to prevent the incision from healing.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	However, if the phimosis is large and thick, then you should incise it with a wide or sharp knife.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	However, if the foreskin is thick and fleshy, then you should suspend it with a hook and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that stop the flow of pus with biting, such as acetic acid, and pus from wounds, and snakes, adjusted to the size of the wound.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide-bore catheter to prevent the clot from forming too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold them for several days and administer warm water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then let the other cure of consolidation take effect until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes certain events occur during the main birth of other flesh, and then you should follow this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is for an abscess in the head, then do not make any incision against the abscess in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	About the cure of hernias, tail, and red swelling that occurs in the groin of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hernias are appreciated by the opening of certain veins within which continuously flows blood from those places where hernias are formed and occur.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	I have already described in the division the types of those and their symptoms, and I said that there are those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, say that hernias and those that are in the front of the head and do not appear to the touch, then in those no incision should be made by cutting.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those that are in the upper part of the mouth above which sensation is felt, those are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And when you put the blade in wet, and then extend it towards the forceps, or use dry cloth, and incise those that are in the teeth.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder over those from the salt of one of the incising powders, such as asafetida and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then soak your feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the salt of the sauce persists, then make that into a decoction of sumac and scraps of almonds and walnuts and similar.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of ordinary and mix that with honey and vinegar, and make a paste with that on the back of it.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the sauce is removed, good; and if not, apply two poultices, and at the nipples are incisions.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in the juice of colchicum or the juice of garlic or the juice of mustard, or vinegar with pepper, and apply it to the area; and then care for the area until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	If you have a sharp instrument that is usually used for such purposes, then use it as I have described earlier.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of the eye socket due to an accident in the upper part.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Special methods for the treatment of accidental abscesses in the upper part, such as boils, abscess on the lung, ulcers, adherent and eruptive nodules, fistulas, emorrhoids, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already described these diseases and their particulars, and the symptoms of them, and their cures in this division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And if you want to know in this treatise about the abscess that occurs in the upper part when it is one of the abscesses that collide with health, and if you want to know how the operation for it is performed with a needle.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain from the abscess in its initial stage is sharp due to percussion and flexion and fever, and sometimes it swells and becomes hard over that area, then do not puncture it, and cure it with what helps to ripen it until the intensity of the symptoms ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then consider whether you should place the woman on a bed with two mattresses; and lean over her back and adjust her feet to the part of the bed furthest from the stomach, and spread out her legs, and place your hand on her chest, and apply what is appropriate to that condition.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow the right arm and administer the instrument that is inserted into the major opening, the shape of which will be described in those causes that will be mentioned.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And consider when you want to administer this instrument that you should stay on the right side of the woman's stomach, and that what enters into the major opening is not more than the width of the woman's stomach and does not harm her.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the tool is larger than the prong of the main, then it is necessary to place powder on the surface of the prong of the main in order to prevent the tool from entering the main prong.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary to place the vertical part of the tool that comes out on top and for the assistant to hold the tool and rotate the vertical part until it is inserted into the main opening.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the exciter appears, and it is touched by hand and lion and moistened, then it is necessary to separate that from the head of the tool with space between the lion and the spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary to place a cotton swab soaked in rose oil or clear oil in which there is some stinging; and place the calyx in the section of the main prong.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place a clean cloth soaked in water in which there are some vinegar on the main opening and above the perpendicular.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it should be cured in two days with the ointment that is suitable for that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Some wounds are washed with the major and minor parts of the body, which is crushed into water and honey, and then the water in which it is boiled is returned to the pot.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the wound is soaked in the boiled major part, then cover it with a bandage that you should not use for its treatment, having care to use that which we have mentioned in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner the fetuses are best medicated when they are not in a natural position.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife knows the natural position of the fetus by feeling it, and when you examine the woman to express the parts underneath and desire to smell the air, and over which is placed a cloth from the part, and quickly feel the position of the fetus, then know that this part is the second natural position, and its position on its head, and the second part is hanging or suspended from the belly.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those symptoms, then press the patient's belly so that the fetus gently sends out light, and when it comes out over its head, then the second stage begins, and this is called good delivery.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	If that is another part of this that is not natural and not usable, because when the fetus comes out over its feet and the body of the patient is facing the head of the patient and the feet of the patient, or the head of the patient is on the foot of the patient, or the hand of the patient is on the belly of the patient, or on the back of the patient, and it is greatly converted over its own neck, and similar to the figures of the unusable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you should show all the figures of those, and what engine is in them for that and it is on that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When it comes out over its own head naturally, and that is very strong on the woman and is done at that difficult part, and the power of the patient has already been weakened, then do that maneuver, or what the women had for the patient, and evaporate the cold from the patient with fenugreek and warm oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the metronome between her legs and gently tear that second skin, or dry it with her finger until that wetness is gone.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman until the fetus is expelled.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not come out, then cover the woman with a mixture of mint and fenugreek leaves.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, approach the crib, that she be calm and make her sneeze with a condition; and give her mouth and nose for an hour, so that the fetus is expelled quickly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two arms of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then gradually reduce them with forceps.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet off the ground, and then shake the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the muscles are not stretched and the flesh is rotten, then incise those parts and extract the remaining flesh or tie the wound to the patient's side with a cloth and extract that also.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the development of the embryo on its own.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the child lies on its own, then encourage it to move those parts, and then turn the child small, and then equalize it, and then take one of its legs and extend it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When they are positioned inside the thighs, then command it to express itself, and do that by gently pressing, because if God wills, it will happen.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if that does not happen as we have recommended, then gradually return the child little by little until it takes the second natural position, because if God wills, it will happen.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited to do all that we have recommended, then take a mixture of aloe and dissolved gum, and grind it well in the mortar for good percussion, and then apply that to the woman's navel, at the lowest part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that cushion in hot water, until you reach the hypochondriacs.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when those parts that have been removed from him are softened, then apply mint and place it on him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the steam has been applied for an hour, then place it on a cloth, and then remove that and extend the mouth of him, and lift from there, and press the lowest part of his abdomen with firm compression, which will help to relieve him.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	And then place the patient on his back and his hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the patient is placed in this position, then gradually engage his fingers one by one; and place the woman's hand on his neck, and his feet down, and those should be on the light, and complete his hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on his abdomen gradually, and remove that which is under his feet from the hollows until it is prepared in the lowest part of him.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the fetus is not forgotten, then take the feet of the patient and move them vehemently, and gradually press what is on the hypogastrium until the fetus can be pushed upwards.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then insert your hands and gradually push the fetus out, and command the woman to expel until the fetus is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The head of the fetus hangs longitudinally from one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It should be engineered in the reduction of its abdomen, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and let her expel it.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it cannot expel, then perform the Jaeger maneuver on the left side, and shake the patient's body vehemently, and administer medicines that you know and recommend for these cases.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the child is born, then perform the Skeeter maneuver on the chest, and study the reduction of its abdomen, and gradually push the fetus out, and command the woman to understand when it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	When the child's head is expanded, his hands are on his chest and his foot is to the side of his greater toe.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The mother held the child's hand and gradually turned him around, and that helped.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is and how much it is equal, then pause over the child's head with that which we have recommended for oil and mud.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command the child to open his mouth little by little, and when you have done that, then make that mixture on a plate and command it to be tilted towards the left, and then command the child to be calm; and do that inhalation condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The outcome of the prepared child is on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the second finger of the mother is inserted into the child's mouth in this way, consider, and then you insert the second finger of your hand into the child's mouth until it is drained of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the child is suspended by his face and neck, then you insert that into the umbilical cord, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then apply pressure to the parts that are intact until the second one opens, and send the woman to bring some bandages, and the servant should prepare a ladder, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The death of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins or many fetuses wrapped in bandages are not natural, and some say three or four, but that is strange and distressing; but it is the cause of nature, and not a living thing.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, even if they are multiplied, one by one, and they are separated by a thread, distinguish those that enter the ligament in the navel of each of those and some bandages are removed as if it is a fetus naturally, and its place is covered with some bandages as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to remove from their place and reach what we have said about unnatural figures, then cure those as we have recommended.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the skilled midwife and does that which facilitates and simplifies, and delays, and is ingenious according to all figures according to what is prepared by the engineer leading to salvation.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some virgins are formed in the mother's womb, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten, and it is already verified that a woman aborts not before the sixth month, and another all of them, which cause is made for the glory of the holy saviors.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all those who are in the science of the midwife that are very useful for that purpose, and therefore they should be used for that purpose.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	About the extraction of the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus, use that which we have said in the division of medicine and do not deface it, and you are therefore able to use operation with the hand, then consider whether the woman is of healthy virtue and not afflicted by any of the accidents by which she is feared for perdition.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is lying on her back, her head should be slightly tilted to the side, and her arms raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The assistant should hold the patient's arms in two positions or lay them flat on their back to prevent the body from extending during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then, you should moisten the mouth of the midwife with oil and a mixture of garlic, fennel, and sesame seeds from the husk.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then, the midwife should place her hand on those oils and mixtures, and then enter her hand into the midwife to facilitate the delivery of the fetus, and then circle around the area where the umbilical cord is in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	In such cases: Then, you consider whether the fetus is prepared to be delivered on its own head, and then you look for the umbilical cord in the neck, collarbone, mouth, palate, or beard, or behind the shoulder blades, or in the propitious places of the chest, or behind the hypochondriac regions.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the patient's condition is on their feet, then in the penthouse, or in the middle of their ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And hold that the hand is straight, and press the curve of the patient in that place which is between the said elbow, and insert your hand with ease and put the hand in any of those places which we have said, until you reach the cause of the pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and press on another part of the patient, or the third if necessary, to make sure it is equally attached, and not stretched too much.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it should be done throughout the entire body, so that the patient's condition is relieved as it is done in teeth to remove it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And in that place where the extension is softened; and if any part of it is held back, then hold that the mother unties those said hands and insert those experiments and rotate those which are held back.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the part of the child is forgotten, then the hands are moved to another place which is more comfortable; and do so until the whole child is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the limb is extended towards the other side, and it is not possible to reduce it by traction, then cover that area with a cloth; and then extract it through an incision in the joint or on the side.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And if you do so on the other limb and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the bone is large, or if it has been damaged by traction in the incision, or if it is too large to be adjusted in its place, then insert between these spines a sharp instrument called "alundat", which will come in various forms in the capitulum that is appropriate for this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Similarly, if the bone is large by nature: and then insert it with a chisel, or take it out with the forceps that we have mentioned.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is exposed and pulled by the furcula, then cut through it to drain the liquid that is in the chest.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If not complicated or obese, then you can sometimes insert the finger second, as much as possible to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the belly is abscessed or filled with water, then you should puncture that part where the moisture is inside.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the foot is on the ground, then the direction of the wound is towards the mouth of the jugular vein.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If it is bound with the belly and chest, then you should remove that cloth which has wrapped around your hand, and make an incision in the belly and chest where that moisture is inside.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are also stiff and the finger returns, then you should insert your right hand; but if the mouth of the jugular vein is open, then you should insert your left hand into the wound, and surround that part, and draw that part towards the mouth of the jugular vein, and then insert one or two fingers inside.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed by an abscess that has occurred to her, and it causes her distress, then before that, make sure it is not too tight; in front of that, administer a wet, heavy draft.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply ointments; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the wound is on the patient's side, then if possible, it should be sharp: and it should be administered as we have said for the live wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be incised with a knife, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And make sure there is no cause of vomiting from the second day onwards.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your work, then administer what we have said about the treatment of abscesses that have occurred to the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is blood flow from the wound, then remove it with sternutatory water and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have already seen a woman in the belly of whom was made dead, and then another woman approached that fire, and then the dead woman was made again.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to him that he had a long time ago an abscess in his belly; and when he approached the fire, he began to shake his arms.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you were called for his care, and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you placed some strong attractive plaster on him for certain reasons, and then removed a bone from him, and after several days, removed another bone; and you were very surprised because there were no bones in his belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you thought that they were the bones of the dead woman.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So you continued to drain the wound, and removed more bones from him, the woman being in her own miserable conditions, and had been like that for a long time, moving only a little bit of his arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not affirm that it is strange, but rather that in this case there is knowledge and help for that which the skilled physician uses to administer medicine for healing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the tooth.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of a mirror used for extracting the upper tooth:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a forceps in which the jaws are engaged, to which engagement there are two mirrors at the ends of two handles.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this mirror should be more delicate than restrictive, and it should be made of ivory or wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each handle should be two fingers wide, and the width of the other end should be one finger wide; and the length of each is one palm and a little more; and in the middle of the two handles there are two adjustments of that measuring stick which are already fixed, of which the length is the greatest of one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are placed in the mouth of the maidservant so that she can take those when you turn the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form of this more subtle and more deceptive poison:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made from a rod of iron or of wood according to the appearance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the end of this addition, there should be times, and the length of those additions is equal to one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to give those to the maidservant, then you make a cushion over her head while her feet hang down, and place that which is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your mouth with the instrument according to the amount you want of the appreciation of the maidservant's mouth until the mother makes her do what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of the poison that the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of an impeller which is pushed into the belly:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The shape of the arm is as follows: the large head
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is shaped like a pair of forceps with teeth at the end, sometimes, and some forceps are made in this form, sometimes, with teeth like those of scissors, which are sharpened and shaped.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The shape of the small arm:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The shape of the needle with a spike:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The shape of the needle with two spikes:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The shape of the forceps with teeth like those of a lock, which is shaped like the head of a child:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The shape of the staff with two ends, which has its head cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The shape of two staffs bent:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more and more species of that and it is prepared by the craftsmen, as it is lighter for their operation and more suitable for women because of their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should always be prepared with those instruments, because the need for them is not excuseable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the second tooth.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second tooth is held, order the patient to hold their breath, and then perform the following maneuver, strengthening your hand over their mouth and nose, and if they resist or cry out, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	Otherwise, take an olive and perforate the roof of the mouth with it, and place it on the tongue, along with calamint, rude herbs, aneth, camomile, Arabic spices, cassia lignea, and santolurea.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are soaked in water in the oil, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a cannula of cantharides in the mouth of the patient, and hold it until the vapor comes to the hollow of their cheek.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then perform the following maneuver as we have said, and the second tooth will be extracted at high speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this treatment is approaching and not yet applied, then command the matron to immerse her left hand in oil of spikenard or in a small amount of aloe, and then enter it into the wound and gently rub it on the second finger, and when that has been found, then take it and extend it slowly little by little if it is attached to the first, then enter her second hand as we have recommended, and when she has found the second finger, gently pull it out little by little so that the first does not violently attract it.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	It is better to move the patient to the right and left sides for ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of attraction so that it obeys and avoids adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the midwife is covered, we have already recommended the cure of sneezing and the medication of the oil with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	And if all the causes that we have recommended are not forgotten, then be careful not to tire that one which is in contact with the mouth of the midwife, but rather cover it with a cloth and apply cristal and tetrafarmacon; because that will cause that one to rot within a few days and dissolve and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When the patient is vomiting, elevate their head and stomach, and that relieves the patient; then give them appropriate sub-fumigations and necessary remedies for that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	In ancient times, they already used fumigation with natron and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument by which the woman is fumigated is for the retention of menstruation and childbirth.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of wood or iron.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the narrow end should be placed in the container and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be done over the flames of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that one until it is consumed, then repeat another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the cure of the child's unperforated anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When newborn children and their anuses are not perforated, those that are thin and swollen.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then give the midwife that should pierce that swollen one; and if not, pierce that one with a sharp lancet, and make sure it does not touch the sphincter.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place your hand on that woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and oil; and then cure that burnt area with the appropriate medicine.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	However, if you fear that it may be poisoned, then place a needle in the wound and leave it there until the child wants to relieve itself.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if the rectum is obstructed due to the consolidation of a wound or an abscess; then cover that consolidation with a cloth, and then cure it with the same medicine and plaster that we have mentioned for curing wounds.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that develop later.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that develop in the lower part of the abdomen and are the most numerous, which occur near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	And if it is a fistula or a boil.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And if that swelling is ancient and comes from the moisture of white or fine pus, and some wounds penetrate into these fistulas.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those who are able to penetrate them are known for that which is due to them from those who have exit and from their vexation; and some use the patient for exit, and often it is due to them from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas are covered in the spaces that penetrate into the bladder, and into the flesh of the wound; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the navel of the wound.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in which fistulas are known to penetrate into the anus and not to penetrate, you place your finger in the anus, and insert a thin iron or iron rod into the fistula when it is not turgidity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is turgidity in that one, then insert the thin iron or iron rod into that thin needle until you feel the rod or the hair on your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all or do not proceed due to some cause of excretion or worms or inflammation, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then let the cure be done.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meatus of the urethra, then the meaning of this is urine from that place and prohibition of it so that the location may be healed by medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	And if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circumference, then it is necessary to perforate it here if there is not turbidity into the bone, and pain in the circumference of the part; and that from it there may be discharge soon; and that it does not heal with that medicine, nor is it consolidated by ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all these penetrating fistulas, there is not complete cure, and the cure of those is difficult and varies from the knowledge of the doctors on which it depends.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And in those that do not penetrate and are not ancient, healing is expected according to what you advise, and that which has already been and was successful.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back, and raises his thighs up towards you, and the cushions should be inclined towards the belly of the patient, and then introduce a probe of plumb or iron if there is turbidity in the fistula, until you know where the probe goes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient is around the belly, then you should insert your finger into the belly.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the tent in your hand and it can be inserted to discover whether it penetrates or not, then you know for certain that it is penetrating; and therefore do not treat in that area, as it is not healing, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, it should be noted that this method is used to treat certain men who are ill.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medication for which one hopes to be greatly helped is that you ignite a thin cauterizing tool according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert that burning tool into the fistula until it reaches around the belly; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the affected tissues have been cauterized, which resemble a quill from a pen.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure those wounds wrapped in a bandage until all the affected tissues have been healed, and then cure those wounds with medicines that generate and consolidate the tissue, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, then at some time it will be healed by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the probe enters, and does not penetrate into the anus, which is in the buttocks, and between that and the probe there is a veil of flesh or skin, and if the fistula is in that place on the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if the probe dries inside the fistula, and if the drying reaches the place where the end of the probe is, and through the probe it is released and catheterized.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulas that are assembled like a quill pen and do not have any cause of those.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	However, if pus flows between you and your operation when you have cleaned those parts, then milk that is and of the pus use a sharper instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because the cauterizing iron with fire adjusts good doses: it adheres to those parts adjusted, and abscizes the pus from the excess of humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Approach and care for those with swollen feet that are wrapped in cloth or covered with a three-pronged tool before the location gets too cold, and then care for the wound by removing the hard, congealed meat.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	These medicines have both astringent and dehydrating properties; when the wound is restored, it heals and there is no risk of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and extends to the surface of the body, then insert a finger into the anus and examine that area.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if the tent is pulled and it enters you and it is covered with skin or flesh, and it is directed towards penetration, then this is not an operation but a second attempt of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This cause is to administer in that one of three ways: either to cauterize that which we have said; or to dry out that which you can reach the cavity for so that it is possible for you to enter and treat those things and the proposed cure; and do not process because of sepsis for so that you do not insert the contents of the wound, and that accidents occur on the patient's will and not from the execution of the treatment; and then care for that which we have said that it is very strong and sirs are healed; or to lengthen that covering and remove that pus which dries out that entrance proposed to the anus, as we have said, or with another sharp instrument, and to treat those fistulated flesh which are in the section inside the wound where you can perform the crustation; and then to force yourself to restore the entire wound section, and if the opening does not consolidate, and the fistula remains open in the part of the anus, and it is more serious for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is closed in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is around the surface of the anus and on the edge of the anus, then take a perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the wound in this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And then insert the probe into that fold of skin or around those; and then insert the probe into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates the edge of the anus nearby, then you remove the skin from that part where you insert your finger into the anus; and then remove the extremity of the skin and adjust the two ends, and stretch each one, and let that remain for a day or two, and when more of the skin is inserted into the flesh, then stitch those parts which are between the two ends of the skin and which can be joined.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then care for the wound until it is healed and cured.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifices of the fistula do not penetrate, then make them penetrate in some way that is suitable for you, but not too much so as not to injure the skin; and then apply a bandage to that area until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spiral probe that is used to puncture the fistula: its curvature is sharp on one end and flat on the other end, so that it does not injure anything that is not necessary, such as sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Suturing of hernias in which there is swelling at the beginning of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hernias are of two types, either between the buttocks like this one, or they are like a lump on the groin.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those, there are small and large ones, and that the swelling comes from those immediately and is one, and its inside, and its outside, and in their extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that have their outside the buttocks according to the signs of little moisture, from which there is a yellowish swelling or a small lump with continuous skin, and its color is like this.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is in the womb is that you command the patient to lie down and expel what is inside before the morning sickness appears and the fetus is visible to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you lean over the patient and hold their hand, and then incise their ribs.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the ribs cannot be incised in those places due to their moisture and softness, then take those places with dry cloth or cotton or woolen felt, and remove those places with the forceps, and then incise those places and powder some appropriate powder on the incision, so that it is at those places instead of a cauterizer; or cauterize them according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the wound does not follow the excretion, then crestize the patient with a cristery in which there is a small bite, and then wash it with that water which is in the womb and which facilitates the excretion better when the patient expels.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the swollen parts deform the anus, the cause of this is often a lie, and you should take those with your nail, or take those with a needle, and scrape those, and then cure those with what we have said before they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And the one who comes before should follow this method for suturing: take a needle and insert it into the skin, then remove the swellings to the parts above, and let the needle penetrate into the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread in the part behind the needle, and longitudinally; and strongly tie the swelling to the structure, and then remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and leave one of them unsutured, so that the excess blood from that one flows out.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place a cloth soaked in warm rose oil or wax on the anus, and place it on the wound and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that area alone; and when it is healed, cure those wounds with ointment or some other treatment until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	For the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Caused by excessive dryness of the skin or natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if those remedies do not work in that medicine, then use a needle or your nail to make the wounds moist and remove the scabs from them, which prevents their consolidation; and then cure those that have consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then use a stronger plaster than the first one that heals and is excoriated; and then cure those that have healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	For the treatment of leprosy, it is necessary.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You should know that leprosy, it is necessary, and not if not noted red spots similar to the crown of a clavicle, and it is made throughout the body and especially in the parts behind the feet and the mentioned ones, and it is caused by those pains.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then cut that which is in the circle of the nail, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its source; and then cure that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the second that precedes in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Warts are small elevated fistulas on the surface of the body, and they often occur in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And its cure is that you extend and cut that, or that you remove it with forceps or a needle.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And the tools used to remove them are already known.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	And the ant is a small elevated or large fistula on the surface of the body, and when it bites there, it is centered in that area, similar to the bite of an ant, and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And its cure is that you take a needle of awl or of voltor, and it is strong, and place the ant over the ant within the circle of the needle's parts; and then rotate your hand with the needle through which you cut that which is in the circle of the ant, and place it in the flesh, and remove the ant from its source.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a needle of iron or steel according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part of the needle above the canula should be thin and sharp, not piercing (it is not perforated), wrapped by someone who knows how to hold the point of the needle and make a turn.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the wound according to what is called in the cauterization of the head in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are used to give cautery.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some wounds are cauterized with silver or iron or bronze or hammered; and some wounds are cauterized with those instruments small and large according to those that are used, because the one that is used in the treatment of small children should be small; and the cauteries of those who have foul or painful ulcers should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small cauteries:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the needle of the canula above in which the bag is attached should be wide according to this method; and it should be at the distance where the bag is attached as often.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of it is left, which is inserted into the anus, like a lion, retracted to subtlety; and on one side of it has two tubes, and on the other side one tube, and the width of the tube according to the size of the rays and the thickest a little.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines of the bladder of an animal or of lamb wool are placed, and the reason for it is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it is pierced by a tube as it is rotated; and if the space between the tubes is the largest of the above.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert it firmly into those tubes with a firm cord, or around them; and adjust the bag; and when the bag is placed in it, it should be straight in the head of the christ, between two distinct strong constraints, and then christize each tube: The quality of christizing each is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be scalded according to the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be placed on their back, and raise their legs up and place something under them, like a pillow or a blanket; and then apply the heated tip of the cautery to the anus with oil or albumen of egg or fenugreek or a similar substance; and then the midwife takes the bag and expresses it with two hands until all the contents are evacuated from the intestine into the bowl; and then remove the bag and the patient can raise their legs to the side.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if that remedy does not work, hold it as long as possible; and if the patient sleeps for the whole night, it is better to repeat it in the morning.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you insert that into the patient's belly with a solution of stomach and the remedy, then repeat the cautery until they are healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are fistulas or abscesses in the anus, then use a thin and sharp cautery from the cauteries that children's caterers use.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the cure of the plaques.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	It has already been said in the division of the cure of the plaques that this is suitable for free people, and thus the cure of those who are male and female with medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that the plaques are different according to what kind of plaque is made and where the plaques occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which plaques are made include gravel in the gallbladder, or incision of spice or of a knife, or percussion by a lance, or a stick, or a sword, or similar to those of other causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the plaques that are in the parts of the body include a plaque that covers the head, or neck, or chest, or abdomen, or thigh, and similar to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And it is recommended that the cure of some plaques be done by placing that reason and rule on other plaques.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple wounds of the head, for the memory of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Then say that when a simple wound occurs in the head and is not a fracture, if it is from a stone or something similar, and has only been washed with water and is large and you fear for that patient because of the risk of abscess, then you should first perform a trephination, and do not delay; and extract whatever is in it according to the quantity of its virtue, unless some cause prevents trephination, especially if the wound that exists from the wound is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if the trephination is on the opposite side of the wounded part; and keep the patient from reflux, violent movements, and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some cause prevents the use of the minimum, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or fish.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And if an abscess occurs in the wound, place a poultice of roasted bread or in oil that is stiptic.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are sure of the abscess, then pause over the wound, if it is recent and its sinew and air have not changed to the dust that I will recommend you to apply soon.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed there, then pause over the wound with saliva until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or is at the beginning of a space and its lips are not adjusted for stitches, then adjust them according to what I will recommend about the stitching of theirs.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound is already discovered from the bone and flesh, and it is not retained by stitches but only by a small suspensor, then scrape that and cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to eat foods in which there is grease: caps and form coyt and similar things until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if there is decay in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then scrape all that dirt and remove it, and cure that.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these areas there is an artery or vein from which unhealthy blood can flow, and it is not cut by medicine, then you should examine the artery, and if you find it uncut, then you should cut it with a blade or ligate it; and if necessity compels you that what we have said does not work, then you should cauterize where the unhealthy blood is flowing.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, the cause of their healing is easy; however, you should powder them with this powder, which becomes solidified and prevents air from moving them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is as follows: take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished charcoal; grind all this into a fine powder, and fill the wound with it, and press it firmly against the wound, and let it coagulate with the unhealthy blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then press it firmly against the wound and leave it there until it is not displaced, because the medicine cannot be reapplied if it is moved before it has healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes it was done alone, when not in your presence and with a sound dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical operation is performed in the large wounds when necessary to be placed on those and straightened, and their recent wounds are covered with their own skin, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially in the summer, then do not use this powder, but instead treat those with what we have said, unless you place it on those wounds with digestive ointment, or place it on those wounds with flour and honey mixed with water until they are completely healed; and then cure them with the other treatment.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if it happens that the wound is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract that which we have said.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the treatment of fractures of the head in that which is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the plague affects the neck, it is not different in medicine, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves of the neck are cut or the artery, then if it is nerves, not in the engine but rather avoiding cure with that which causes strong hemostasis, as well as ziniar and zegi say vetriol and similar to their own quar nozo to the nerves and contrazo aquel.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place your hand over any cause of the whole plague, because the substance of the nerves is fragile and the continuation of it is to the brain, which is one of the most important of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that which is cured of false medicines, as it is caused by washed with warm water, some vinegar in olive oil roasted or not roasted, and thucia when washed with warm water and the others peyras minarantz according to this manner, and find humitz.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the plague is great, then administer sutura, or cut the lips of it, and then cure that with powders before it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the pain is deep or accidents occur in the lowest part of the body, then perforate it in the most protected area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If the pain is already accompanied by bleeding from an artery and blood flow occurs, then separate or dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent that from happening.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the spinal column of the gallows or the entire one has already been cut, and the veins of the neck are saved, then adjust the lips of the codex with a suture on the neck bone and do not touch that; equal it to that and reduce it to its natural figure, and strengthen it with a structure that is decent, and let it heal with ointments in which there is astringency and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the pain has already affected the bones, then perforate it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all those that you can from it; and what you cannot remove, let it heal within the time that the pain persists, and it should be separated and the empty space in it should be filled.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the pain is recent, then sprinkle it with the powder that was recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If the pain is caused by an abscess, then treat it with the ointment that will come to mind when you remember its capital.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the pains of the neck or similar, when they occur between the shoulders and are treated with a spatula, a fork, a lancet, or a similar instrument.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If the pain is caused by a lancet or a fork, and you observe its depth, then consider whether the patient's breathing becomes faster; then you will know that the pain is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth and the pain is recent in its own place, then you should place powder on it during the first hour, and do not strain it so that it does not remain in its depth and that it returns to the body and that any fluid does not accumulate in the patient, but rather place a poultice attractive, and remove those bands on that day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the gout does not present itself to you, then place your hand on the wound's edge, so that the moisture can drain; and make the patient lie on their side so that the liquid can flow out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	However, if the wound has passed three days or more without causing spasm, tremor, heart pain, or stricture of the chest, and other signs are good, then you can know that the wound is healing; and then treat it with warm compresses and other remedies until it is completely healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	However, if the healing of the wound is delayed, and it has been opened for a long time, then you can know that it has formed a fistula; and then treat it through its neck.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by a cut or a sharp object, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat it with water that is used for stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has already been done on the bone, and you have already cut around it, then twist the plate and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then let the wound breathe, which is beneficial for the extraction of the plate.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other plates in the other members, the healing is similar to what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plates of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition that occurs in the belly is either large, or small, or mixed.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Some of the large ones are in the intestines or nerves of the intestines, so it is necessary to make an incision into them and sew them up more forcefully and more subtly.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And the disruption of small ones is difficult to do by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult, so if you do not make an incision into them as soon as possible, because it becomes open and swollen, making the treatment of it difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And the best disruption is to migrate, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the hernia, as it is difficult in those two special cases.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You should know that there are four methods for belly sutures, but two common ones are usually used in sutures of other body parts.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other proper sutures connect to other body parts, but they are more proper in the belly suture.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I advise you to each one according to exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore say that when the part is small and there is no cause of the hernia for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then in one of those two methods: either by permanence of the disruption as we have said, or when inflammation comes to the hernia due to cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And then when that is the case, you should cover it with a sponge soaked in warm water alone, or you can hold it in warm water with cyperus, spic, and embrocations at that hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Sometimes applying this remedy in the area where there is stasis, and it is better than just water in resolving inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which salt and vinegar are dissolved, because for this the instrument of the patient is relieved from pain.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	And if the instrument of the patient is not removed from this cure, then gently separate the disruption with a small sharp instrument that is not blunted by rust.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first cure is best when it is appropriate that it not dry out, and it is not occupied by the need to dry out or wither away.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, if its shape is like this:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is sharp and pointed, and the other part is not sharp, and its tip is thin, but not as thin as a needle, with a slightly blunt end.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the pain is increased and the intestine comes out, then return it to its original form, in its proper place, if possible above that, because it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is widespread, and in the lower part of the abdomen, then make the patient lie on their side, and support their legs as high as possible; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place your hand on their head and the other on their chest.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the lower parts of the abdomen, then quickly place your intelligence and consideration aside so that the part where the pain is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus, administer this in the severe and mild cases.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the mild cases, place this that is prepared by you between your fingers and make sure the administrator holds the disruption completely in their hand and adjusts the lips of it, and remove one stitch at a time if there is any cause to add another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common method of stitching: take a needle, or a needle of the appropriate size for the width of the wound; and leave a length of thread from the end of the disruption of the ring, and tighten the needle once, or make sure you do not put it in both ends of the suture, both ends of the needle that are outside the parts that are below the wound, until you make that penetrate into that part; and you have added both ends of the suture and both ends of the needle, and make four stitches.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then apply strong force around the circumference of the needle, and some stitches in several parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by addition of decency; and then leave the large one of the same and insert another needle into that, and then tie that with a thread as it is with the first needle; and do not stop doing that until the needles are all completed within the entire contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of medium size, because thin needles easily penetrate the flesh; and large ones are difficult to pass through the tissue, and therefore it is advisable that they be of medium size.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And do not allow the needle to be left at the ends of the wound intended, so that the flesh is not easily penetrated and that the wound heals before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they should not be prolonged in stitching so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then carefully insert the ends of the needles so that they do not pierce the patient, and place powdered substances on all parts of the wound, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them in until you know that the wound has consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of stitches with needles should be used in small wounds, as they have one or two or more needles in their stitching.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second stitch is similar: and you administer the four ends of the ligature, two ends of the thread, in a way that the needle is wrapped evenly in thinness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that part of the thread where it began, so that the correct thread does not rise from the wound, so that the stitch is the second stitch of the strong cloth.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the amount of thick oil from the aforementioned medicine.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch is for women.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And this stitch was used to close a wound that occurred in a man's abdomen, which was pierced by a knife, and was the disruption of the major muscle of a palm, and was located around two palms from the intestine of the middle member; and then you reduced it so that the intestine had been open for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and it was closed and healed; and then use this ointment for many years, and keep it in its proper conditions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had thought that it would not be healed; and for a miracle, why you did not close it with that egg, which was in a place where the egg was not usually or at all medicine, but kept over the wound for two days and frequent baths of honey water until the fire healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two types of sutures according to the narrative of Paracelsus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And if you begin with the suture of the tendon, then insert the needle from the part of the forearm to the part of the wrist.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so, when the needle penetrates the tendon and the other hand holds the needle in the place where you inserted it; then have the other needle penetrate from the part of the forearm to the part of the wrist in the other hand.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And so, after you have finished that penetration, then make the other needle penetrate in the other hand's wrist from the part of the forearm to the part of the wrist; and leave the other end of the needle where it is, and have the needle penetrate in the other hand's wrist from the part of the forearm to the part of the wrist.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the other needle penetrate in the place where the one that is doing the penetration is doing it in the needle's end, which is in the part of the arm where all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin at this point, and with that, gently pull the edge of the intestine that is on the other side in the other direction, and extract the needle from the suture, and return it to that suture and cover the end of the intestine that is on the other side with this extracted part; and extract the needle from the suture that is on its side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this again and again, and do this again near another suture until you have finished all of it according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the advantage of this method of suture is that you sew the skin with the needle, so that you sew the intestine one stitch from the part of the end of the suture, and let the other stitch until it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And the second special method of suture, which is called by the doctors of that time and recommended for this, is that you sew that second semi-lateral part to its corresponding part at the right place; and apply the end of another part to the other end of it, and the end of the mirror to the other end of it, and do this according to your recommendation.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you insert the needle at the end of the mirror near your own part, make it penetrate into the part of the body, and lay two ends of the thread; then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from the part of the body to the ends of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then rotate those needles, and make each one penetrate from the part of the body into the ends of the mirror on the other side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of stitching is better than the common ligature, and it is the stitching of which previous memory was mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the word of Guaila
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And moreover, they say that the stitching of the belly is rectified with two needles, so you should insert each one with a thread, and begin with the insertion of the needle of which you are supposed to do, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the second stitch of those which cover the hearts equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When a disruption occurs in the middle part of the belly, it is more difficult to suture than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of medicine for plague is judged by the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The reason is that when you acquire the plague recently, the first remedy is to deny that the air has altered it, reduce the intestine and wrap it in that and prepare it properly, then place powder on it.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then place on it an ointment that is present and makes hard and stiff and consolidates and cools; and cure it as is the cure of other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have the remedies present, then place on it a tansy, which begins to cause sweating, vomiting, and change the two remedies every day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in simple cases when the plagues are present.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague may cause injury to the principal members, then apply a cloth dipped in oil of good quality, or oiled, and place it around the affected area, and cover it with bandages.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the intestines, then apply a stinging black mustard plaster, and more so if the putrefaction has reached the intestine and is causing severe pain penetrating into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You should know that the pus that comes from the intestines is less dangerous for healing than the pus that comes from the fine intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to heal the intestine that is called “gegunu” from any plague that may be in it; this is because of the large number of veins that are in it, and because of its great size, and because of the subtlety of its nature, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If the wound is on the back, and you manage to see it recently, reduce it according to your correctness, which reduces the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has passed through the space and has already been done white or black, then place a bandage over the area that is discolored from it, so that blood flow does not come out of the veins and arteries in the wound.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then insert that which is another from that limb, and place two ends of the bandage hanging down from the edge of the wound, so that it is alleviated from the attraction of the wound to the cavity of the wound and emission of the bleeding from the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the wounds that occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because they have seen the one who was wounded in their belly by percussion of a lance and was the wound of the middle part of the stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula, and they were able to manage and ventilate it.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I continued the treatment of him who was already cured, but not yet healed, by subtly introducing fire that heals and consolidating the area.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And then I placed a cloth over the patient's abdomen to cover the wound in his belly; and he did not suffer from that wound and remained eating and drinking, and was put in bed and was exercised in his said condition.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And it was said by experienced ones that when a wound occurs in the intestine, and it is small, then one should do as follows: one should take large needles; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those needles with its point over the two lips of the wound; then when you put on those and strengthen your mouth, cut off the cap of the wound, where it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another needle at the first one, and do not stop doing this until you have done it for all the wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that area and the pain; and remove those things that are attached to the intestine inside where the intestine is healed; and do not cause harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine can be sewn with a very thin thread made from animal intestine, rather than with a needle; and you should take hold of the end of these threads of intestine, which should be very sharp, and then bring the end of one thread to the other, wrapped around, and then insert that thread into the needle and sew it to the intestine, and reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing is only a second option of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the pain is large and widespread, especially in one of the small intestines, then it cannot be sewn, but only drained, and not healed from all of it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the cure of fistulas and abscesses.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	When the entire plague and abscess, when it becomes inflamed and ancient, and is turned into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and causes constant pain in the arm, and is not excised, then, in any member where this occurs, it is universally called a fistula and we call it the "old wound".
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	A second truth, a fistula is a narrow, hard, white wound that does not cause pain and is located in the same cavity as a boil; and for this reason it is not called a "second wound".
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in a moist wound that causes pain, the humidity is often removed in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this humidity is moved, and it is thick, and thin, and liquid.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned in the division, as I said about wounds, that every ulcer that is not healed or is not in raw flesh, is not that but one of these causes: one is by the absence of blood in the tissue; or by the malice of the ulcer; or because between the ulcer and the lips there is hard flesh that prevents the natural growth of flesh; or because the wound is moved too much and the matter that is at it is of bad quality; or because the medicine used in its treatment is not suitable; or when corruption catches in the region, and it becomes a pestilence; or by the property of the region, as in the case of Saragossa, where digestion of diseases is difficult, and healing of abscesses is slow by nature; or because there are one or more bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	It has shown all those causes, their symptoms, and the treatment of those diseases in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And now I will tell you how to treat a fistula, which is made by surgical operation.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas can occur in all the members of the body; among those that reach great veins, arteries, or nerves, or to the spleen, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the spinal bones of the back, or to some of the joints composed by such a composition as that of the hand and foot; and among those, they are those that are closest to the main member and similar to it.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore among those fistulas that follow this manner are difficult to cure diseases, and do not receive treatment, and occupation is difficult due to labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of the fistulas has a depth that does not reach those places that have been mentioned, and you expect and believe in its treatment, and you want to reach knowledge of it, then take an iron or a needle, and if the fistula goes straight, and you find it there.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that thin plug, for the thin plug of the body's elevation is relieved and straightens out the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has horrible contents, it is not possible to place the thin plug over it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cleanse the wounds by their wounds, for the moisture by which you cleanse that one also goes into the others and heals them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then carefully inquire, according to the method by which you can recognize if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the long fistula or propdana is the cavity of the fistula, or if it is a fistula with many contents and is completely covered by it, and whether it causes the patient's suspicion, and the investigation of the cause of the pain due to your compression on the area, and similarly to the meanings and causes of the accidents to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all those causes accurately, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in salt water, long from joint, or of nerves, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which I have said to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry the fistula after it has been opened, and remove any pus that is in that filter and rotten flesh, and any matter that is born in the orifices of the flesh, or in the thighs and similar areas, and heal that wound so that it becomes healthy.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is long and deep, then cut it as much as possible from the front, and remove all the rotten flesh; and apply poultices covered in acute medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that several times until the acute medicine corrodes everything that is in the cavity of the fistula of the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it becomes healthy.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it does not become healthy by that, then cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be confirmed to you, then inquire about that and seal it as we have recommended, unless you prevent any cause of vein or nerve or main member present as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and it is in any corruption and blackness, then remove that which the corruption is held within; and cure that which is inside that which is not healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and there is no gap as it used to be, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and therefore you must expose it again and carefully make the reason of it and its cleansing with the strongest fortified tie, and then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, well; and if not, then know that that corruption is in the deep length of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore you should not try to remove it but leave it there.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the broken bone is small, or it is possible to pull it out, then use delicate forceps suitable for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If you have the strength to extract all those, and none of them are held by any cause due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if there is any resistance due to the moisture, and they do not cause fear or error at the beginning, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are near, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you do not have the preparation of an oyster to remove the bones of your hour, then place a suitable poultice on that area, and let it enter that area where that poultice is near those flesh and ligaments, and keep the poultice from being consolidated, and strengthen the section that you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	However, if you fear, then place it under the skin with three drops of oil, or under the skin with Egyptian anointing oil, or in any of the oils, because when they are poured on those ligaments, and the bones are separated from them, and those attachments are alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If there is a large bone like the thigh bone or the cushion bone or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the surface of it, then scrape off that rust only behind where that blackness and corruption is, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the place where the corruption reaches, and then cure it before it becomes consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you to use that which happens to a man in his thigh for placing that support and aid on your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around the age of thirty, who experienced pain in his thigh, and from the parts that are swollen and discolored is on the matter of the body inside which the matter reaches the thigh, and it is matter of a large abscess, and not from an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the doctor extended the heat to that area for a while before the abscess was formed, and then the wet matter was removed, and the cure of the fire was paused until the bed became fistulized, and in the meantime, all the painful parts were treated, which all healed quickly and the humidity of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then all the doctors treated him for about two years, and the fire was not in those parts but in the art, until he was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And he saw the bed of that part and the matter that was running from it to those painful parts, and his body was completely yellowed and the color of it was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then he inserted the tent into one of those painful parts and reached the tent to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then he quickly examined those painful parts and found that they reached all parts of the bed.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then he showed and inserted into one of those painful parts, which entered before he described a piece of the bone, and at the same time he rotted that, and it was already rotten and corrupted and degraded; and a part of the bed had already penetrated into the intestines.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I will show you that which was discovered and prepared from the bone that was exposed.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And then I will show you that which was not in the bone but rather that corruption which I removed and prepared, and it had already been disrupted.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then place your hand on the wound with consolidating medical remedies for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then you will again open and discover on the bone secondly over the first discovery, and again continue the corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And then I will show you that which appeared from that corruption, and then you will perform the cure for it and its restoration, and it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I will discover over it another way and not cease to gradually incise the bone in particular parts, and perform the restoration of it, and it is not restored until you have incised about a palm of it, and that which was extracted from its marrow, and then restore it with those medicines, and it is consolidated more firmly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And repetition is not necessary in the operation of cutting into him and sectioning him, but only for the disposition of the surgeon and the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death, which leads to complications in all hours due to excessive evacuation of bad breath.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so, the healing is for complete cure, and nothing is in place of hard flesh; and it is good to dispose of him in his own body and return his virtue; and he is converted in his dispositions and does not do anything against him in ambulation or harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If it is an eminent bone in the place of the body that has already been broken, then you should do this: and you should take a bandage and strong thread at the end of that eminent bone, and command anyone to extend that over; and pause that bandage of thick wool from the first bandage; and put it over the flesh that is left after the bone, and extend the outside of him so that it pulls the flesh to the parts left, and you should uncover the flesh over the place which you want to sew so that the stitch does not hurt the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	When the table is placed incorrectly in front of the bones, it is not forbidden to use the saw that does not dry out the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And the sawing should be done gradually over the rotten area, where if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear on its surface, then another method should be used for the sawing.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is rotten and not eminent, from one continuous piece to another, and the corruption is at the middle or in a separate part, then you should remove all the flesh from all parts; and afterwards place a cushion, and use the saw of the first part where the corruption is until it is continued with the sawing of the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the sawing should be done according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, insert the rotten joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it should not be sawn in the ratio but rather in a curve.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the chest or foot, it is difficult; however, try to find out where the corruption appears to you, and cut that area, and wash it according to each possible disposition, and let everything be corrected by you when no contrary wind or nerve comes.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	You should know what are the saws and the serrations to cut these bones according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and parvity of those, and their hardness and rarity; therefore try to prepare all kinds of instruments suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You should know that that operation means to you in the special case of the instrument that is needed; when you are great in study and long and knowledgeable of the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of illnesses, then you have already learned how to use that instrument for every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will find the number of simple instruments that you will use in this chapter, which you will process according to your prohibition, which you will experience on the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Another form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Another form of saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Another large form of saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of rake:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this rake should be in the form of a star-shaped hook, and its points should be in the form of the points of the astrological sign of Aries.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And you should not use it unless you rub those points on the joints when they are corrupted, or if it is a large mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of flat razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another well-made saw: make the arc of it as large and sharp as possible, and the handle of it from wood, and the point of it from iron.
Forma de lu:	1. Form of him/her:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	2. Form of a razor in which there is a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	3. Another form of a razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	4. Another form of a razor with a curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	5. Another form of a razor resembling a needle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	6. Another form of an instrument that cuts bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	7. Another form of a smaller cutting instrument:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	8. Another form of an instrument resembling a saw, with its end like a blade, and is used in certain places in the removal of bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	9. Another form of a saw that is suitable for drilling through bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	10. And its end is triangular and has a sharp tip.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	11. And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly coated with all the causes that we have mentioned of razors, cutting instruments, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	12. Of the cutting edges of bones and their sawing.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	When the extremities are affected, either intrinsically or extrinsically, or when you have treated that corruption for the cure of those medicines and the cure does not come, or when the corruption leaves the member without any cause, then you should insert that member into that hot water, which is close to the corruption, so that the patient may escape from that death or harm, which is greater than the loss of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the reason for that member is that it is burned black within, or if it becomes red before it is cooked, then it will rot inside that member and spread throughout the body; therefore, I advise you to insert that member into hot water.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if the corruption is caused by the pressure of certain poisonous causes such as a scorpion's bite or viper or ruetella and similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or pressure is in that member, then you should insert that member and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the main body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if you approach the patient, then insert that of the reed into the wound, and do not give space to corruption until it takes hold in the reed of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you insert that, then insert the arm into the coyd in the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if corruption passes around the coyd, then that is the death of the patient; and in treatment, giving another cause or that is a quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, do for the foot when corruption inserts that into one of the nuts.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take in the toe of the foot, then insert the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it can enter into the knee, then insert the leg into the joint of the knee.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already reached the knee, then in that there is no cure but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of inserting the member or cutting it is that you strengthen the ligament at the part you want to insert, and strengthen another ligament over the area; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts behind, and extend the minister another ligament on top; and you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments a span wide until all the flesh is discovered; and then insert or cut.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover the wound with a cloth from all parts so that it does not touch the area, and bring the patient's injury and abscess to the right position.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If bleeding occurs while working, then cauterize the area constantly, or place some restrictive powders on it; and then return to your medical practice before it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then tie the wounded member with a suitable bandage and cure it within the time it becomes healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And also tell him that the same accident that you and I have discussed, which occurs in a man's foot, is caused by a blacksmith's fire that is similar to a burn from a flame.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption occurs first in the same foot before it affects the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared for more severe treatment than the cure to go to the wounded member with the intensity of its pain and burning, and that the unskilled person cuts the foot at the joint, and it heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, it has happened to that same corrupting disease in the mentioned part of the body.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me, and I was able to reflect on that excess of the thing that was placed on the body of the medicines, approaching the cleansing of the part of the body; and if the excess is not reflected, it begins to go to another part that begins in the body.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to incise the part of the body, and I did not want to do that hoping for the reflection of that excess, and more than I feared the beginning of the incision of the body, because the virtue of the patient was weak.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And then he left me, and returned to his land, and it reached me that that man prepared and incised the whole of his body, and was cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narrative except to be helpful regarding that which is caused by this illness, and that it has meaning for the one for which it is meant, and according to which it is done.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the care of sinuses and the quality of catheterization with medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in a fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and it is broken and perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the place becomes like a vessel, and the code that is over it is covered with fine cloth, and it does not reach corruption, and it does not press on the bone or the nerves or the ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged until corruption enters a member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the care of it is that the entire code over it is turned as it is rolled up, and more so when it is covered with fine cloth, and you make sure that it does not stick to the place because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you hope that the code sticks and that the corruption has not been completed because of previous consequences, and in the code there is a hole, then you treat it with a catheter.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you should consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the brace that is used is of a certain odor, then use this Egyptian medicament which is made of oil and wine and zinc, and they are mixed in equal parts, and they are poured into a vessel, and they are covered over the fire until the medicament boils and reaches the desired consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and cleanse the sinus, and strengthen the orifices of the body, and leave the medicine in the body for the quantity of ten hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that which is left; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the pudor remains.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes, when this medicament is not present; and you should take the ashes of wood, and put them on the water; and then bring that to a boil and cleanse the sinus until you confirm that the sinus is now open.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then prepare a clyster with honey and charcoal mixed together, and prepare another clyster with honey, because honey has the property of softening and cleaning, and it helps the sinew to adhere more, especially when there is an excess of stiffness and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	If you have done some of these things and are confident that the sinew has returned to its place, then prepare a clyster with the water that makes the flesh return to its place.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And if you take some diaphragm fat and dissolve that rose oil and vinegar, which is stiffening; or if you prepare a clyster with some medicines and other oils that have the properties written about in the treatise on oils.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the sinew are narrow and cannot receive the clyster needle, then gradually insert that oil drop by drop, and cover it with Egyptian oil or basilicon oil until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the anus is also open, then you add stitches to it and leave some of the quantity in which the gut is attached.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the anus of the part where the intestine is pulled up is dry, then you dry it in the lowest place that is in it so that the intestine can pass through again, because when the intestine is constricted in its initial state, the flesh will be in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the intestine within the lowest part of the bone as you wish, then you should prepare the member with the preparation that the intestine usually follows according to what is appropriate and that there is no cause in it that retains the intestine.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that are placed on the intestine appropriately for that which you want to extend over that drap of linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the linen should be of such a large quantity that it covers all the intestine; and then insert the forceps in the right of the anus of the intestine, a large tube a little larger than the anus; and then extend over another linen from the belly of the leon according to the quantity of the tube, and place it over that for a long position of the anus of the intestine so that it is separated from the bowel of it and does not push the linen large but appropriately with a few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	When it is above the orifice of the sinus, which remains open at all times to allow for the passage of what is in the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	So that you know whether what comes from the arm is food or not, or if it is digested or not.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And if you observe the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And if your treatment continues in this way, and you see that the matter that is secreted over the orifice of the sinus has adhered, or if it has not adhered, then you should remove it or remove it on the third day, and when you remove the plague, change the dressing and renew the poultice.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the sinus is full of subtle viruses, do not despair of the adherence of it, because the healing of that will eventually happen, and in some people it takes a long time for the generation of flesh in those plagues, and in others it is the opposite of that.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the sinus becomes filled with undigested food, you know that it does not adhere; if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, then adjust the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as with a diaphanic ointment, when they are adjusted with excessive addition of salt.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	The best way to cure it is to take a diaphanic ointment and dissolve it in rosy oil, and place it on the wound as if it were in its substance, and comfort that ointment with this one, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And in the same way, when there is no undigested food, use honey when it is thickened, and use it; or take mallow root and aloe, and grind everything together over the fire, and apply this powder on cloth and strengthen that on the sinus; and apply the same honey on the wound when it is thickened, and strengthen it on cloth.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Some remedies are administered according to the long-standing and rightful use of celestial lily (and it is celestial lily) and flour of wormwood, and centaury, and use of those simples or adjustments, triturate and grind those and powder over the honey that has been recommended; and use of that.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinew is prolonged and not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the bone of it, and already makes an inspection in the bones or in the other hard members or in the ligaments; then you cure it with fistular cure as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of cure of broken toes and nails and incision of the finger added and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an abscess that does not come out from the nail of the said toe of the foot or of the foot, and very often it comes out in the other said, and as it is prolonged and its cure is highly valued, it is a cautionary abscess or it is corrupted, and quickly breaks into the bone before it eats away the root of the nail, and very often it corrupts all of that, and very often it pervades its corruption into the bone until it reaches the said fetid odor, and the end of the said toe is made black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have that same tool that we mentioned in the division and do not compare your cure with it, then carefully insert the entire excess that remains from the nail, and then cauterize the area with that tool, which is useful in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is sound and the nail is healed, and the additions of the nail can already connect the flesh to the parts divided, and they begin to pung and lead that, then carefully place a thin layer under the angle of the nail that punctures the flesh, and push it towards that, and insert that flesh with ease, and place over it what remains of the flesh from the medicines that burned corrosively until it is all healed; and then cure that with that.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already entered into the bone, then carefully insert that bone and the extruded parts, because there is no time when it can be healed if it is in the corrupted bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the corrosion and corruption are coming into the same place, then carefully insert that in one of the nails according to what is prescribed for its memory, and then cure that before it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the toe is injured by a blow or a fall, and the pain is very intense, first, you should flex the patient's foot, and then quickly cut off the toe with a sharp knife in a transverse direction above the joint, and be careful that the incision does not penetrate into the flesh that is behind the toe, because you will cause great pain to the patient and may cause unnecessary damage to the flesh.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, it is not present in all men, but rather in the flesh of some people, and it is often found in the bones, or it is often found in the toes.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some people do not have it at the tip of the joint, or its origin is in some nodules of those mentioned.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	However, if it is not present in those nodules, it is not bad, and if it is not present in the joints, it is often harmful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are not fleshy, the incision is lighter, and you should make an incision at the tip of their joint with a thin knife.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	Because of the location of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, avoid its incision.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When the location of the bones is not given, first make a round incision into the flesh until you reach the bone, and then use an appropriate clamp to hold it, and cure it within that time when it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Because of the location of the bones between their joints or by birth of the person who was born with it, or by consolidation of plague or by burning of fire, or by similar reasons, therefore avoid that consolidation until they return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place between their clothes some olive oil mixed with rosewater to prevent them from being consolidated unevenly, and separate between those, or place between those a thin piece of plaster until it is consolidated according to what is appropriate.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly, if consolidation occurs in the palm of the hand, then you should remove that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the figure of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	At the beginning of symptoms, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	When symptoms are varicose, their veins become thick and full of melancholic superfluities that cause pain in the limbs of the body, and the main event of them is in the hips, especially in the hips of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you should administer a black bowel purge to some patients with strong expulsions, and then draw blood from the patient's great vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Their cure can be done in two ways: one is to cut and insert that black bile, and the other way is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of the thigh is done in this way: first, boil the hip with a tail to enter quickly before the black bile becomes too thick, which is feculent from the hip, and then strengthen the patient's leg at the most superior part of the couch, entering under the blanket, and dry the vein in one place, or two, or three wide section, and then raise the black bile to the middle of the thigh, above and below, until the amount you want and how often you want, and the patient can bear it.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then approach her, and command her to avoid foods that generate black bile causing anger.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that does not help the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of the bed is done in this way: you raise the patient's bed, if it is possible by the legs, and place the hot water bottle on it and massage the patient's leg with hot water until it becomes warm and the veins are opened; or it should be exercised by exercise strong, if the bottle is not at your present, until the member is softened.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then apply the cord in the right of the vein for sectioning in the long or in the back of the patient, or in the lowest part of the leg you should do the drainage, or in the lowest part of the foot you should do the bandage.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then apply the cord with a needle and excise the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch, and it should be done by the one who sees that patient decline to black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And thus, as you have already taken out and removed that white, thin cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place the bone back into that hole which is raised and rotated from the cord, and suspend it on an open jar with gold.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another section close to that section for three times, and then scrape the cord from the part above the vein where it appeared.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then lift that and insert it into the rear section of the bone, and then extract it and place it inside where it is on the second section, and then extract it from the section above.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do that inside where you extracted it from the section that is most subtle or most distant from all the sections, where everything is inside; and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not follow the instructions to extract and raise it, then insert a strong, double-edged needle and tie it to that, and extract it, or insert it behind the bone and rotate your hand in all parts where it is rotated.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to lacerate it; for if it is broken, it is difficult to raise that part and it comes out over the patient and causes harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when that entire area has been cut out, place it over the wound covered with wool soaked in oil and not soaked in oil, and cure that part until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is twisted and has a tortuous shape that does not follow the rectitude we have mentioned, then cut it at all the tortuous parts of it and in the places where it is enveloped, and suspend it on hooks until you lift the entire part.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful that you do not lacerate the vein and do not harm that part, for it is difficult to raise that part; and use your wisdom in that matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision made to cut the vein:
Forma de unci orp:	The shape of a hook:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be as sharp as the hooks or of sharp extremity to avoid harming the vein; and it should be made of flexible lion, for if it is too thin, it will lacerate the vein due to its thinness; having enough thickness as we have mentioned.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of extraction of the vein from the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the hollows in lowlands, such as the Ategi in Arabian lands and in the lowlands of India, dry and arid lands with little vegetation, and in which there is no grass or abundance.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is often generated in other parts of the body besides the hollows.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its decomposition is from the putrefaction that leaves the wound behind, such as poison that enters the body of snakes and worms and parasites and worms generating between the wound and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the susceptibility of its occurrence is from this vein that happens in the hollow, very inflamed; and at the location, it is blistered; and then the vein is drawn out from the location of that blister, which seems reasonable from a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then, when it appears from there, you should cover it with a cloth of lead, which is the weight of a dragon, about two dragons, and tie that one and leave the lead suspended from the hollow.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so many times when some cause from them leads to the parts being displaced, wrap that in cloth and do not allow that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you insert a piece of it and wrap it around; do not insert that of the rind inside until it is outside and dry, because if you insert that, it will contract and go into the flesh and cause an abscess and pustule in the spot and ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it may be treated properly and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the back of it and there remains no cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it is extracted in some people who are in the length of their arm and hand, and it has reached me that it is one of twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is inserted at the time of their treatment, then introduce the ray into the wound of it and pierce that along the long track of the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the spot for some days with medicines; and cure that by the cure of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein has some obstructions, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to it with painful symptoms, and is from which opening it comes.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat that as we have said in the division and apply what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section of worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in some places by the name of bovine sickness because it is caused by many obstructions in the belly and it is a worm that is not between the intestines and flesh, and it goes through all the body and causes it to swell and break, and it is shown at the feeling of its own part of member in member before the intestines are disrupted and come out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is from the putrefaction of some humors such as worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarids in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for the malignity of it, because when it goes into the body and is raised to the head, and reaches the brain, then very soon it enters and destroys the brain, and that is caused by many obstructions.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to heal that and extract it, it is not done unless you first observe its position and appearance, and then strengthen the part above it and the part below it with a bandage and tighten it strongly, and then dry it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is located in the flesh and not exposed, then you place a pointed cautery with fire on the area where it is, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of it which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see that it has reached the top of the bone, then strengthen the part above it with a strong bandage, and then dry it and extract that; and advise the patient to use medicines that evacuate bad humors from their body, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Due to excessive pain.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is not named in our land gout, and it is pain that occurs in various members, and it moves from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And now I will tell you the second thing that I will recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	He was called to a sick woman in a village, and discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after it had been removed for an hour, he saw that inflammation go away as if it were worms moving in that way, more lively than it should be, as if it were silver when running from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain of that place disappeared and remained in the muscle, and after an hour, it was like this.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then correctly in the other arm until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I recommended to him that he should turn around his whole body after seeing it, and it was too marvelous about the change of it and the speed of member in member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen that happening in some people after that manner, but I had also seen words that those were not caused by the change of member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I have never seen such swelling in the breasts as in women.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I have not thought that this was the case only because the woman was old, with dry skin and exposed veins, and in this state, the sensation of heat was reversed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this reversal does not appear in those who are delicate and have a soft body with constricted veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And as you wish to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, do not apply heat to that place as we have said, but strengthen it over it and gently press on it until it is covered with a layer of heat, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see that swelling in the breasts, then cure that exclusion of the body and that which expels heat, and carminatives those bad pills and those of serapi and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of extraction of herbs.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Herbs are diverse according to their species, and according to the parts of the body in which they grow, because of their diversity is that some have large points, and small, concave, and deaf, and solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those to which there are tongues; and of those that have stalks.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the second part of the body where the second method is used: when the main members or their main parts cause pain, such as the brain, heart, lung, and lungs, and similar organs; and when pain appears in any of these members and you notice that it is a sign of death, the cause of which you should avoid extracting if possible, and when these symptoms do not appear and the organ is not hidden deep within the member, then extract it and cure the ailment.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And when pain appears in the spine of the servant and passes through the bone, and is above the skull, which is on the brain, because of violent convulsions, scotomy, vertigo, pain in the jaws, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms and mixing of understanding and vomiting of anger, and great fever destroys the word and the voice, and is above the location of the wet white substance similar to pus, and yellowish from the same as swelling of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if you find yourself in such circumstances, then you should refrain from the cure and extraction of the splinter, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the splinter is close to the heart, it is located near the right breast, and it feels like it has caused a severe injury, not a minor one; and the movement of the splinter is similar to the movement of the limbs, and it causes black discharge, and if that fever spreads to the extremities, and sweating, and shivering; and then you know that death is approaching.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And when the splinter has pierced the lungs deeply from the discharge, and the vessels that are close to the neck have become inflamed, and the patient's color changes, and they breathe heavily and quickly, and demand fresh air frequently.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the splinter pierces the skin on the chest, and the pain is close to the ribs, and it causes great sharp pain and a loud cry, and does not spare all the members of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the tongue is stuck in the stomach, it often causes severe pain and vomiting of undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the tongue is stuck in the abdomen and remains there, it often causes some pain or tears in the stomach lining, intestine, or intestine that is ruptured, and there is no hope of recovery without its removal.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the tongue is stuck in the bladder, and it blocks the urine from being excreted, and it causes some cause for the discharge of the parts, and it often causes severe pain on the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other parts of the body, such as the face, neck, shoulder, back, ribs, wings, and thighs, and the similar parts of the body, are saved according to the major dispositions when the tongue does not block a vein or artery and is not poisonous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	I will advise you of what I have seen of these tongues, so that you know how to treat them.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of this is that in a man, the sage plant grows in the lacrimal gland of his eye in the corner of his nose, and he extracts it from one side to the other, through the grays of his eyebrow, and it is cured, and does not harm the eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And he extracted another sage plant from a Jew who had it in his eyebrow, through the eyelid, and the sage was already hidden and not achieved from that one but a small part of it adhered to his face, and it was a great sage of the sharp sages of the Turks, with no eyebrows.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was cured, and no harm occurred in his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And he extracted another sage plant from a Christian man who had it in his groin, and it was an Arabic sage, and it was the one with eyebrows; and then he inserted it into that one between two fingers, and it was already submerged in his groin; and then he carefully removed it, and the Christian man was cured.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And another sage was extracted from a man who had fallen into his abdomen, and it was thought that he died from that; and since he had not changed for thirty days and nothing happened to him due to his conditions, she incised over the sage and drained it, and he was cured, and no harm came to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And another man was seen in whom a sage was found on his back, and the infection had spread over him, and after seven years, the sage was absorbed into the cushion.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And a woman was seen in whom a sage was found in her abdomen, and the infection had spread throughout her body, and she did not change in her conditions and the woman was not harmed in some of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And another man was seen in whom a sage was found on his face, and the infection had spread throughout his body, and he did not feel any pain, and similar symptoms to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And the sage was extracted from the prince of the king who had fallen into the middle of his nose and had already declined to the straight part a little, and the entire sage was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to heal him within three days of his sweating in the sickbed.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I again examined the wound of the patient; and then I inquired about that pain with subtle questions, but did not feel it; however, he felt it at the point behind the ear, and then I suspected that that point was related to the wound.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied the ointment in that place where its virtue is both attractive and digestive, believing that this place would help me to find the location of the wound, so that it could heal over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no accident occurred in that location, significant of the wound having reached that place; and I continued to apply the ointment on it for several days without any accident; and the wound was healing at the same time, and the patient remained without pain for several days until one day the patient felt pain in his nose and told me about it.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied sharp and corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until the fire was gone, and I examined the patient again, and again I felt the subtle location of the wound, which adhered to the skin.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then approach and adjust in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until I can see the end of the suture, and pass through my time with that for several months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then approach and adjust as the wound becomes larger, and place the forceps in it, and remove that, and do not neglect to continue subtly and ingeniously on that with maneuvers of engineering until one day you can hang the forceps descent from those, according to the shape of those at the end of the chapter, until you extract that; and then restore that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And although doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and I restore that and the wound is consolidated, and the patient is healed completely, and there is no damage in it in any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some sutures for which you can understand that rule and meaning on that which I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by narration or do not comprehend those freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the craftsmen know how to compare the few on one side with the many on the other; and they find that the operation is new and the instrument new, which must be descended from the external causes when an accident occurs.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore it is said that wisdoms are not forgotten in the members in which they are fixed, but rather by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which they are inserted; or by the opposite of the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is forgotten by the place in which it is inserted, or comes from the flesh, and is attracted and forgotten.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the order of the hour in which it is catched, then cover it for several days until the flesh that is around it becomes soft, and allow the attraction of it and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is fixed in the bones and does not obey your order, then leave it for several days and repeat it with attraction and moisture in each day, and it will be forgotten.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey your orders promptly, then carefully cut around the spine in that bone of all parts until the space is widened enough by the saw, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the saw is stuck in the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the abdominal cavities, and the patient shows signs of those accidents that I have mentioned, then stop the extraction of the saw and leave it inside until it is equal to your orders; because if the saw pierces the brain, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the saw is not stuck in the bone of the body but only on the outside and does not pass into the brain, and the patient remains alive despite these circumstances, then you engage in the extraction of the saw and its removal.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is stuck and you do not obey for extraction, then administer sawing around the saw as we have recommended, and cure the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the wound has already been closed in the body's cavity, and it is closed from the sensation, then you should ask for that medicine, and if you feel that, then you should inject that medicine into the patient with a suitable syringe.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the congestion of the wound and its length, and there are no nerves or veins, then you should make an incision on the wound to enlarge it and make it possible to extract the wound.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you find those tools in the part where it is stuck, then you should remove all the flesh from that part with all the instruments that you can use; and invent ways to do this, if you cannot remove the flesh from the fracture of the bones and the twisting of those parts.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the wound in any part where it is, then you should use your hand with forceps to all parts that make up that object; and subtly perform the subtlety that the wound is not broken and that it is made to your difficult attachment to it and that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot do it at that time, then wait until the parts that are in the circuit of the patient can be repaired, and then repeat that which is usually done.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you have difficulty in stopping the flow of blood, then administer the remedy that we have mentioned for the cure in its capital chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your skill in the beginning of a vein or nerve or cord, and administer medicine in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the sickness; and do this with ease, tranquility, delay, and firmness, as you would if you were doing it yourself.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, you should make the patient lie in a position that is according to the figure by which the fire for the cauterization of the sickness is done in him, as it is more useful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if you cannot do that, then administer the remedy that is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But if the sicknesses that are expelled by the contrary of another part, or if any part has already proceeded to the parts outside, or if it causes softening of the exterior of the sickness because of the part that is above the proposed code and sometimes that eminent; then you should separate from that; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps are taken.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bone, then gently rub against the opposite direction until the knife is in the bone, and widen the opening, and then remove that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave that for another day, and then insert it when it is possible.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the knife is in that place, then push it against that.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If it has fallen out and you want to administer an injection, then insert it into that, if it is hard, use a hollow needle to push the hollow space of it into the coat of the knife and then push it against that.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the knife is hollow, then strongly push it against that, because the knife is guided by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the knife is poisoned, then carefully remove all the flesh in which it is located, if it is possible to do so, and then cure that with that which is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the knife catches on the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is close to where you touch that with the tent, and it is possible to cut above that, then cut above that and be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, and then remove that, and after that, if necessary, apply a plaster and cure that before it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Shape of forceps that holds the jaws:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	With its extremities shaped like the beak of an eagle, which is made like a claw when placed on the jaw to prevent it from slipping:
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And among them are special, large, thin, and flexible ones, according to the quantity of the size of the jaw and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and its construction:
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of a concave hollow at this extremity with the beak of an eagle in order to prevent the instrument from slipping on it, and to push that deaf one:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of a deaf extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	With the beak of an eagle in order to prevent the instrument from slipping on it and being pushed into that concave jaw:
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of vein puncture.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of puncture, of which there are sixteen in the head, two pulsating veins that are near the temples, called jalisains; two herbs that are in the two temples, and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two eyelids that are called aspics; the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guidegils that are at the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are left of the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	May the veins that are cut in the chest be visible; for one of them is cephalic, and it must be tied with wild silk; and the people call it "the cap vein", and it is deaf, and it is a migratory vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and the people name that one "the vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein that is tied in the domestic rib, and it is called "citillar", and the common people name that one "the belly vein"; and the veins of the arm, and it is tied over the fire, and it is the vein in which it is cut, and it is the vein that appears on the foot for apparent manifestation; and the little vein, and it is the vein that is between the inner ear and the smallest, and it is in the two ramps.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the thigh there are three veins; one of them is tied with the curve of the wild silk rib; and the second is sophena, and its location is on the thigh of the domestic rib; and the sciatic vein, and its location is on the thigh of the wild silk rib; and in the thigh there are other similar veins.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The swelling of the veins that are close to the ears is an ancient and persistent disease, causing headaches and old sores on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The quality of treating those is as follows: it is to wash the patient's head, and to rub the patient's head on the back of the neck in the place where the veins are thick with a cloth of good friction; then strongly press the patient's neck between two places that appear at the sides of the head, and the places near the ears; and ask for that one, and if you feel the pain of those, here is an attempt.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the surgical needle, and that one which is inserted, and then introduce it behind the vein in the neck through where the flap comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand with the vein and the neck to the parts above and insert the vein at the beginning of the incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be about twice the diameter; and make it as deep as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And apply strong pressure on that which is unhealthy to be healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And before the beginning of this book, there was the indication of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Of the two veins and arteries that are at the temples, the benefit of phlebotomy is ancient and has been misused and abused as an excessive and acute flow of blood to the head.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is second that I recommend to you: strengthen the patient by their own neck with a finger through which appear the two veins at the sensation for manifest and demonstrate their polarity on the other side; and then you should try.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you should raise the cord above the vein at the parts indicated by the other side, and insert the phlebotomy into it, and raise the vein in its; and insert that as you have done in the two veins others; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then remove the bandage from the patient's wound, place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place it on that side and press and strengthen that area with great constraint, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And then the memory of their names, and those who are unknown, and the attachment to the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And then the venipuncture of the front vein is approached from the cephalic vein to the patient's old facial wounds, and emigration, and rogue and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the venipuncture of that is as I recommended to you; so it is that the patient should strengthen their neck with a band that appears over the vein; and then take the instrument called the fossor, which has this form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the puncture at the top of the fossor on that vein and strike it with a pen or another cause in the manner of it, and leave it to run blood according to the amount you want; and then remove the puncture from the patient and strengthen that area until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Some people use a bronze probe, but do not let the probe be sharp at its end like other probes, instead make it blunt before the sharp end, and probe along the transverse line where the bone is prop and strong to avoid breaking the bone when it is thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The swelling of the two veins that are next to the lacrimal glands of both eyes due to an infection in the eye and inflammation in the eyes, and in facial diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the bronze probe is that the patient should bend their neck forward and lean on one side, and then probe along those areas, and you should be standing over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	The probe should be inserted along the transverse line in a short distance from the probe, where there is no flesh; and if the probe is thin, it will easily break the end of it.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply pressure on the wound as much as necessary, and place your hand over those areas, and stretch them with a bandage, and then remove those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the fleubotomi of the vein from the nose be compared to acute fever, strong sweat, and facial maladies such as rash and migraine, and especially when it becomes chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the fleubotomy in this case is that the patient strongly holds their neck and brings their own nose to your left hand, and takes the subtle fleubotomy long and places it in the second straight location on the top of the nose, where the vein does not appear to the senses, and where the pus begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	So that you gradually place your hand with the small fleubotomy and make the pus flow according to your need; and then clean it with a cloth, as it is restored better.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the fleubotomy of the two guidegui cause constriction of the arm and at the beginning of leprosy and other maladies such as impetigo, bad corrosive ulcers, and herpetic conditions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of that podiatry is that the patient should tightly tie each foot to its own ankle with a bandage; and the artisans stand over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a mattress.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then the podiatrist gradually wraps the long vein with a bandage, and removes as much blood as is necessary or as much as possible; and do the same with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then remove the bandage and tightly tie both veins with a ligature to prevent the patient from being frightened, and leave them in the bed until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of that podiatry for the veins is to prevent small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of that podiatry is that you should make the patient sit, and tightly tie their ankle with a bandage, and then rotate their lips and look at both veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the proof of each is by the darkness of each of those, and that which is more so is when there are small black veins around them; and then incise each from the beginning.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you have any doubt about what to do, and you don't know which of those is correct, then you should understand from the incision of the largest of those, and the most manifest of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the same incision as the two veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	If customarily, more is to incise the two veins that are on the lip below.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	If from the two veins that are below the tongue, the jawment is to approach the lancet of the cephalic at preferences that are in the throat, to the patient's uvula, and to other mouth ailments.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of lancet those is that it follows the patient between your hands downwards, and raises the tongue from it, and looks behind the tongue, from one side of it vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then lancet each; and you should be careful that your hand does not end up lanceting those, because after those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized in the groin are on which all men bleed, and the phlebotomy of them is done by two methods, either they put a leech with a small tail or an olive tree at a declining angle; or they cut the phlebotomist and call it venipuncture, and this is the form of it.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this venipuncture is suitable for section and of those who are specific, late and subtle according to the size of the veins and according to the condition of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of leech with a small tail phlebotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	And the leech of it is like this sometimes, and suitable for opening convex veins full proceeding from apparent thick veins, and to those that contain heavy swelling.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of leech with an olive tree phlebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this leech is of less breadth and more subtle end, and suitable for phlebotomy of thin veins that contain subtle citron.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the judgment of the fleubotomy of the great vein, which is one of three veins: four extracts the sand from the maladies that leave the gallbladder and the collar, and from that which goes through the chest and the abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And advise the fleubotomist, when performing that fleubotomy, to be careful in that area, where there is an artery, and if it is off-center and misaligned in the puncture of the fleubotomi, cut that artery and cause a flow of sand, so that no fleubotomies are performed with that fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear as expected, then advise that you leave that and move to the other, or that you surround some part of it; or that you perform the fleubotomy in place of it at the end of the arm, where it is manifest, and cut that with the fleubotomi alnessil as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to perform a bloodletting on the patient's arm, first determine the location of the artery where you will make the incision, and then place your thumb over it; then lift the arm and cut the vein along the concave section of the elbow joint, as we have said; and be careful not to perforate the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you see that the wound is healing well, apply pressure to the location where you placed your thumb, and if this pressure causes the artery to swell, then release it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If you see that the blood is flowing like a child's urine in the bloodletting wound, and the blood is thin and watery, then know that it is from the artery; and then cover and press the wound with a clean cloth for a long time; and if the blood stops flowing, then strengthen the arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And guard the patient from the cold and do not expose them to it until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the spleen is not removed, and if you must not present medicine to it, then you insert the artery, which appears to you; because its extremity is contracted, and the spleen is removed; or you take a scar from a fistula, and perform that, and take one thread and strengthen it over the location of the vein, descending from the membrane and into the other side.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the spleen is removed, it is good; and if not, then cure that from which the preceding recollection of the location of the powders abscindent flow of spleen is made.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The removal of the spleen from that location is difficult due to the small space of the belly and the possibility of the membrane of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	If the vein is dark, the subclavian artery is greatly used to remove the spleen from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And approach the person who is most afraid during the bloodletting of the patient, because that one has a vein; and then adjust the puncture of the bloodletting to the vein, it will cause great pain to the patient, and the healing of the patient is difficult, and often not completely cured. And this vein appears as a wavy line on the skin; and if it is hidden from others and is subtle and not shown, then approach the bloodletting with the one you have done the incision of the artery, and avoid the vein with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should puncture the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The danger of bloodletting from the vein of the head is that it draws the health from the head and contributes to the illnesses of the brain.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And approach this carefully, if you want the bloodletting to be done with an olive or a myrtle branch; because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not touch the artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	May it be noted that the laryngoscope you have should not puncture the back of the neck only, but rather circle the area more closely, and not touch it, unless it is atrobat during the first percussion.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, if the abscess is in a man, when it is not laryngoscoped in the first percussion, then do not touch that abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the laryngoscope and its accidents, in which you should consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is the one you know that laryngoscopy is not administered except for the conservation of health and the hope of it and the caution of future diseases, and that it should be performed laryngoscopy in one of the veins that are in the chest, such as: cephalic, fusca and basilica; and that it should be performed laryngoscopy at the beginning of primaveyra, before breakfast in primaviera and autumn, and in winter at mealtime, when signs of replenishment appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And it should be done between the first and third hour of the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The bleeding that is administered should be done as needed and convenient, whether at night or during the day, at all hours and in all circumstances.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is forbidden to bleed those who have not reached the age of fourteen, and women should not be bled except during the fourth month until the seventh, and those who have passed sixty years should not be bled.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if anyone wants to be bled for any reason, they should first check their veins with a lion's claw, if there is a wound held in place, so that the veins do not spill excess blood during the bleeding of the veins, which are pure and do not cause harm to the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And those who are suffering from seasickness, drunkenness, or have escaped from illness or intoxication should not be bled until they have fully recovered, nor should those with hydropsy be bled, and bleeding should be avoided in cases of colic, vomiting, and stomach pain, and in cases of multiplied gout, work, and exercise during meals or vigils, and for all causes that dissolve the virtue, whether it is corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And then consider the subtilization of humors that cause this, if the swelling is large, with food and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then introduce baths and if any cause does not prevent, or is exercised by some exercise so that the swelling is subtilized.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And place the fleam on its chest during the day, around the hour of tierce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And perforate that chest so that it is kept in that day from all animal misfortunes, as we have said, such as anguish, ira, fear, and all physical accidents, as we have said, such as labor, excessive pain, cold, and similar things to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at its bedside make it present the causes in the use of which men have aromaticity and odor and baths and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the fleam over a cushion that is put or that of that which should be fleammed.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then carefully extract the patient's arm, and wipe it with a cloth or three times; and then tightly bandage the wound and wrap those cloths around it.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the stricture is cold, as it is not equal, or the stricture is superfluous, then prevent the flow of the bile; or if it is a softening, and then prevent the flow of the bile entirely.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then apply the stricture, so that the one who should be bled wipes their hands together between their fingers where the veins are inflamed, and declare it to the sense.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the bleeder takes a small amount of ancient oil properly; and places their finger on the indicator of the right hand over that vein, where the blood is to be drawn, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is set so that from those veins which are located where the cord would flee from the bleeding, and of those which are full of venosity and when paused the bleeder over that one is contracted, then the bleeder should be removed; and if the bleeder does not touch the vein, and if they do, that one is strict.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for that reason, the flagellant should be stopped and investigated in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then pause the flagellant, but if the vein is punctured in a vein, then it is; otherwise, you repeat that other vein nearby that location one or two times, or over the patient's heart, if the location is not apostemat.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is apostemat, or the patient becomes frightened, then you leave it for one or two days, and do not strain the bandage, because that would cause the abscess to burst, nor would it penetrate into the body.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the flagellation if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the puncture is small and corrects itself subtly, and you think that it may not be enough to reach the desired amount, then you repeat the flagellation in that area again with straightness and adjust the bandage a few times, and do that heart procedure while the location is apostemat, because the location becomes apostemat in some people after a few punctures.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	If that wound has already become inflamed, do not touch it, as it may cause any harm; and place some part of the cloth of oil on it, which will help heal the body's wound.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is best in this case to use oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, administer oil bandages in all phlebotomy, which veins doctors prohibit from the body's blood, and they perform tyriac alfadoc and sagzenea when placed on one of those over the area, as the wound is made thin and is turned when it is large.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the location of phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, which is caused by clots, and more especially to that which has not been bleeding but only clotting, or in the insertion of the vein a little, and then you cover it, and place on the location sponge infused with water and salt, a little warm, and strengthen it for an hour, as it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And cover that you do this close to the opening of that vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is any blackness or greenness in that place, do not do this; and if you want, pause over that some cause of anointing and of myrrh dissolved, or some cause of sugar or honey or a similar substance to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And move the swollen and raised parts with incision of the base of the tongue.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand over that, and if you later find softness of your compression over that, then that elevation is bad and bad; and therefore guard yourself that you pause over that some cause of which we have said, because it will greatly flow from the artery of the vein.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make an astringent in that which is stopping, so that the place is durable, and cure that with another cure before it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And cover that you extract from the vein to all men according to the amount of its virtue and according to the color which remains over the vein according to what appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the bone is black, leave it to soften before removing; and similarly, if you see it swollen, leave it to become thin before removing; and similarly, if it is sharp, remove it when its sharpness has been lessened.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if the person is tall and strong and needs to have a bone extracted in a wartime situation, then amplify the fleurette of the vein and let the fleurette be on the left.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in the case of a weak person, do the opposite of that, and let them extract it in a wartime situation, and let the track be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best thing to administer in vein puncture is transverse section, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of vein puncture saves from bone and nerve damage, and is more praised and safer than second-latitude and second-longitude puncture.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And when syncope occurs during vein puncture, then let them cure that with a small amount of infusion in the form of milgrana or simple oximel; and extract it from the bone in three or four wartime situations.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is a complication of complexity, then take a syringe and infuse it with essence of mira or essence of honey aromatized with species such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar spices, or with an aromatized essence and a certain odorant.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if the syringe is accidentally punctured, and its cause is the issuance of a certain amount of blood, then take some water of flesh and an aromatized essence with a subtle odor; use an aromatic balm, and let it be applied to the wound.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the chapter on syringes for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to bring their own arm and dissolve their second blood clot, cover the syringe with the same one that is used for forced evacuation, and its virtue is free, which evacuates the small amount of blood continuously according to the quantity of its virtue in the days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	When someone wants to perform the surgery on their own arm, and they are very strong, then do so around 7 or 9 hours after the first amputation.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	When someone wants to remove their own ribs from the opposite side of the part where they are inclined, it should be done on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When that rib in which there is a severe pain and inflammation, causing a high fever, should be removed with great care, and a large amount of it should be amputated before the symptoms of sincope occur, so that you will have preserved all the conditions of the amputation; and that your hand should be placed on the side of the ribs, to prevent death from sincope, which is caused by ignorance and negligence of the surgeon.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you want to remove the arm and evacuate the second rib, after it has been closed and difficult to remove from the vein, do not force it with such violence and bend it excessively, as this is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the layman who is to perform the phlebotomy, or remain that, with the sharpness of the lancet that is coagulated from the vein; or pause over that of tyrian silk, or of sagenea, and compress it within that the blood is not let out too quickly.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that and do not touch it until the inflammation is subdued.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary to evacuate the blood again, and there is no excuse, then sign that on that spot or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called “funis del bras” is phlebotomized in the place of the fusca or the basilica, when it is not atrophied or agglutinated, which are composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of that phlebotomy is that the patient introduces his hand in warm water until the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then apply strong pressure on the narrowed part of the urethra; and then insert the catheter second, not laterally or in line with the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make your catheter insertion wide and place it at the joint of the arm where you inserted it previously.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the discharge of urine is prohibited, then you should immerse the arm in water and let the urine flow into the water until you achieve your purpose.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	However, if you are in the days of summer, then you should be excused from immersing the arm in water and the same applies to placing the body of the patient in cold water in the time of winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the catheter insertion in this vein is safer than from all other veins, because it does not have a pulse or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the catheter insertion in the back of the arm is like the injuries of the leg.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of this catheter insertion is that you press the arm at the elbow or at the arm, rather than placing it in cold water, until the vein is inflamed and has been demonstrated to be veined; and then insert the catheter transversely; and if you insert it from all angles, it will not hurt.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And do not let your hand remain on the patient's throat, leaving them exposed to the risk of damaging their nerves.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then repeat this process in the lower back, as if you do not repeat it there, the blood will clot in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And as the blood is extracted according to the amount needed, then you place your hand on the vein or salt, so that it does not become solidified constantly; and similarly, you should do in every straight line.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The difference between the throat and your hand is that they are compared to the maladies of the melon.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same in the throat as you did in the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the difference of the jugular vein from the throat is to the maladies that are in the part behind the neck, similar to the maladies of the mother, and retention of menstruation, and to the maladies of the ronchos and ulcers of thighs and legs, and their similarities to the maladies.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the foot bath for him is that the patient inserts his own foot in warm water and makes movements over the friction area where the veins appear; and ties over the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the location of the vein is taken away from the said pain, and from there it branches out on the surface of the foot as a ramification.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then perform friction on the widest branch or behind the cushion, where the vein is located, and place it under the bandage, which is better and more salty.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform friction on that on the surface of the foot, then guard yourself from the nerves that are located above the surface of the foot, and pause your friction with the one you friction through, as if you wanted to insert it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the friction be silent.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the discharge of pus is prohibited; then you rub the foot of him in the warm water and let the pus run out in the area where it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the flue-bottle is mistakenly placed in the first vein, then repeat the procedure on the same spot, as the location is safe; and do not fear the malice, but rather guard yourself from the nerves as we have mentioned.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, make a point on the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic vein, the location is as we have mentioned, behind the knee of the wild animal's leg.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the juice from the flue-bottle procedure is at the angle when it is properly cauterized.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the flue-bottle procedure is that the patient is in great pain, and quickly and strongly presses the cushion under their leg from the side of the wide entrance above the knee into a long, subtle bend, which does not appear otherwise.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you flue-bottle each opening that is possible and transverse, which is better; or incise those at the beginning or sever those at the end, as the location of this is safe.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in men more common; and if you find that one, and it does not appear to the touch of all, then apply a cotton swab to some part of it, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot and the ankle.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and make a small incision in the amount you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then remove the structure and place your hand over the area of the cotton swab incision and press on it, which is usually healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of the remedies and qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Remedies are of corn, or of earth, or of verdigris.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Remedies are made in two ways: one of theirs is incision and extraction of pus, and the other is remedy is incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this remedy that is incision is made in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the remedies that are administered with incision and extraction of pus are fourteen parts of the body, one of which where remedies are placed is called alnocrati, and the last part is divided into the head; and the middle part of two parts of the neck is underneath the chin; and remedies behind the jawbone after the mouth; and remedies of two spoons; and remedies of an eagle's beak, and it is on the edge of the coccyx; and remedies of two tongs, and they are of two bones; and remedies of two cavities; and remedies of two cushions.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And if the incision does not extract the pus from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason, the virtue is not obtained for those, as it is sometimes done by phlebotomy; nor should one believe that ventozacio should be made with fire or hot irons in some bad condition for folding inside before the whole body is completely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	However, if it is necessary to cause ventozacio due to illness or continuously, administer it at all hours at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at some time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of which is that men in the ones in which pus multiplies inside before the need for extraction by ventozacio and abscess in their own head gravity and so; and of those who abscess folding and pain in their face and in their head, and in their neck; and of those who abscess excessively in their face and in their front and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and of those whose location of their ventozacio is affected; and of those whose taste is multiplied; and of those whose tongue is swollen and discharges pus; and of those who sleep is multiplied, and of those whose sleep is painful with fever and nightmares and other causes similar to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it happens in some cases of those, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth toe, then command that a blister be made before it has passed two or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And it is necessary to drain the blister from the nape because when that confers gravity to the head and that which is poured into the veins, but rather that that be appropriated evacuation of all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this blister is in the location of the lumbar puncture of the cerebral.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not good to use that which is of simple complexity, or in which is catarrh, because it gives great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that reason do not use those of the old, and in the heads of which are diseases poured.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And rather than that which is continuously on that is made forgetful; and for that reason do not order the blister maker to place his hand on the parts behind, lest the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	May it be noted that the ventilation of alcohol is in place of fleubotomy of the femoral vein and the basilica: and for this, it confers asthma, and the constriction of the lungs, and the scissure of the stomach, and coughing, and the replacement.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary that the alcohol ventilator be small, if it is placed underneath, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the ventilator of alhagdahan confers the accidental pains in the head and to the tongue, and emigration, and prefocus, and pain in the teeth; and it is in place of fleubotomy of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it is necessary that you command the ventilator not to press his hand during the scarification so as not to pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the ventilator placed in the mouth confers alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar to those of the maladies that are in the mouth, and it is in place of fleubotomy of the herb that is in the lower lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the steam that is made over the two spoons be compared to a cap, which is made for the purpose of retaining heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the steam from the two parts of the forks is greatly helpful in the process of vein bleeding, which includes the basilic, femoral, and cephalic veins, where those veins that are most superficial in the flesh, and those small veins that branch off from the other larger veins until they reach the three main veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the steamer that he not proceed with incision, because the area is exposed to flesh, and then his nerves and arteries are left.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And there is a steamer that is used to steam over the buttocks and is compared to the hemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcers that are left behind.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And make sure that the steamer is large and made of iron, because the area requires strong separation; and it should be thin and used for incision during the incision process.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	When the bed is covered with many blankets, which pulls the entire body down, and relieves old pains of the ribs, the back, and the bladder; and provokes menstruation, and relieves constipation and diarrhea; and takes the place of tracheotomy for two hours, and alleviates coughing, and two hours of caviling.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, it can weaken the entire body and cause hiccups in some people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the blankets, alleviating coughing is preferred to alleviating coughing with two hours of blankets.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the blankets is that they are placed at the beginning of the night and gradually increased in temperature, and do not prolong the position of the blankets, but rather pause them occasionally, and maintain them constantly, and let the humors come to the place for equal advent.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease repeating this and continuing until you see the place already reddened and inflamed, and that the pain of the back appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you should shave and repeatedly scrape the skin in small portions, and then consider the position of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that man who has thin flesh and is prone to ulcers, you should shave him in one go and not repeatedly, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the blower to fan the shaving and apply a small amount of it, and at the same time facilitate the scraping.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if in the shin it becomes thick, then shave twice, because in the first shaving, the path of subtlety to the shin and its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second, at the examination of the acquired moisture of the extraction of the shin.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the shin is too fecal, then make a thorough shaving in the third cleaning to obtain the rear.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the shin little by little or a small amount, provide us with a shaving.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if you want to extract a thorn, use a sharp incision; and if we know that the thorn is large, then you should make an incision with a pointed instrument.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term "scarification" refers only to the depth of the cut.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the one who has the thorn has a large, hard, black thorn, and its pores are straight, then you should choose locations for the incisions that are more lenient, open, and resolved; if it is in the summer, use oils like aloe, lavender, or chamomile oil, or camomile oil; and if it is in the winter, use oils like narcissus, lily, or camomile, or thyme oil.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is large, rough, then you should choose oil like amaranth, or basil oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, or similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the thorn is in wide pores of thin flesh, then you should avoid using oil, and instead use water like solar water, or fresh water, or water of chamomile, or similar ones.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the patient's skin is moist due to excessive humidity, wash their armpits with vinegar or a solution of salt, water, and similar ingredients.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the patient's excessive perspiration is thick, wash their armpits with vinegar or a solution of mint water, tarragon, or camomile tea, and similar ingredients.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is important to keep the armpit clean; having been cleaned, it should be administered immediately after bathing for an hour or two, and it should be kept close to the armpit.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is the reason why one should be bled before being washed?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	If the person who is to be bled or the one who will do the phlebotomy is irritable and has a sharp and inflamed skin, then it is important to use cooling causes such as vinegar, sour milk, laytuguas tea, secanabin, julep, and similar ingredients.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	Pause their meals and place them with polenta, and meat from chickens, and cooked foods made with herbs, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	Of that which has a bad complexion, take borage or borage of acacia seeds, and sumac, and some fragrant herb between old and new; and recommend to use little wine and food, and pause the meals of bread, cane, pepper, small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And recommend that on the day of ventozacio and bleeding, the wine is greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And recommend that wine is given to some men with tyrian alpharac, or medicaments of musk, so musked, or alcelita denant the ventozacio or denant bleeding or nearby, so that the main members are strengthened and that the sinew is refined; and do not recommend that they take that scalfatz.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Let the ventozas that are their incisions be ventozas that are paused over the feet, and above the calf and gout, and above the navel, in the places of the joints, and the big toe, because these members do not suffer incision over them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those but for attraction of blood from a member, such as a cotton bandage on the breast in case of blood flow from the wound of the navel; and they use that to dissolve the moisture of the member, such as a cloth on the abdomen and umbilicus; for that refreshes the member and draws out the blood and relieves the pain that is resolved by moisture.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is placed on the ribs when they are affected by hernia or boil, for the strength of attraction quickly heals the hernia and eradicates the boil from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, when it is placed on the foot and ankle to draw out moisture in those affected by swelling.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these bandages are administered with success only sometimes; and some are administered with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered full of cold water in the afflictions of the ankle.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is why the bandage is full and large, so it is cold water alone or water in which herbs suitable to it have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The form of ventozum administered by fire: the width of the orifice should be twice the distance we have formed it; and the quantity of the powder should be the length of one palm; and it should be placed on the side of the wound, in the location where it is in the circle, the most towards the wound, the thread should be small according to the quantity that enters into it with a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of hair or citrus, with thick margins, lion's teeth, and sharp edges so that it does not harm the member in its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it should be at the edge of the longitudinal wound made of hair or iron, where the candle is placed by the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this ventozum should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and the amount of it should be less according to the illnesses and the state of the person who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The ventozums of children and the elderly are different from the ventozums of young people and large-breasted women.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of applying this ventozum by fire on the member is that it extends the flame from the wood decently in front of a small candle of wax, and place it at the edge of the longitudinal wound in the middle position of the ventozum, so that the fire is lit around the part where it is not burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And place your hand on the patient's body, and the dressing over that, until when they are holding their breath and do not need to open the dressing and let the steam out over that area, then the wound will soon be dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And apply the medicine according to its method, and repeat that if necessary for that area.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In a wound that is being treated for pleurisy, use water, in which there is no transverse or longitudinal incision, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water and placed on the body alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the method of it: This dressing, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter XCVII.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Blood-soaked dressings are not administered to any body parts except to those in which it is impossible to position ventosas, such as the gums and similar parts; or in a naked part of the body, such as the nose and similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodsuckers that are in the waters of polluted pools.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then take the patient's clothes and place them in the water of the polluted pool, where they are boiling, and do not cause any harm in their stomachs; and then evacuate the body through the beginning of bleeding and vomiting; and then rub the patient's limbs before they become red; and then place them on top.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to ventilate the area with wind, it is better in a room.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with warm water and then apply hot water; and then rub and express.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body of the sick is prolonged, then place it in the pool of bloodsuckers, and then remove that cloth from above when the drainage is complete.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the wound is multiplied, then powder it with vitriol trisulfate, or with garlic and similar substances to stop bleeding, until the wound is separated; or place the most ripe beans on top of the wound, and leave them until the beans stick to the wound, and then separate the wound.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, transfusion of blood, when possible, change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if blood transfusions are prohibited from suspensions, then apply heat to the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the places where blood can be found; and place your hands over those, as the blood will soon dry up.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to cough, sprinkle some powdered aloe vera, salt, or ash on those places, and they will cough soon.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	And here begins the lecture on the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh child, know that many foolish doctors and the common people and those who sometimes do not follow the books of the Ancients or read one letter of them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason this method of the sciences on our earth is hidden; and I have not done so at any time, but I have learned it after a long reading of the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science of those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And approach the study and experiment throughout the length of one's life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described all of that in this chapter, which contains the main science and upon which the best experiment was passed; because it also brightens up for you others and delivers it from the occupation of length; and it also brightens up in the end of brightness; and it also shows it in the end of declaration; and it forms in it some forms of the instruments that are administered in that, as it is done by addition of declaration, such as has been done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from the fact of bone fractures, from those of which previous mention is necessary before we begin to remember the membranes of the broken and different ones of each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	So that we may say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the speech; and the chapters to which understanding is given, upon which the artist and the station are placed on the truth of those; so it is you and those who know or learn this noble art other than you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	When a fracture or dislocation or twist or carpal tunnel syndrome occurs to someone, it is customarily called a "fleubotomia" or "alleviation" of that, or whatever else, unless there is some cause that prevents it, as in the case of debilitation of virtue, or if it is the one who is affected, or old and decrepit, or if it is a time of great heat, or of great cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with eating fresh herbs and bird flesh and crab; and do not eat large pieces of meat or fill yourself with foods that fill the veins with sanc, until you are sure of no abscess, and if you do not fear effusion of matter into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their usual first treatment.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the bone is beginning to be restored, it is customarily called "nutrition" of food that is heavy and thick in which there is viscosity, such as bread made from wheat flour and water, and rice, and caps, and peas, and bellies of cows, and hooves, and fresh fish, and large and similar to those, and this regimen is made by coagulation of fracture more lightly and mildly.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you know that the bones of the skull when they are in men who are in their prime and in the elderly, cannot be continuously and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are continuously and consolidated according to their nature at all times by the drying of those members, and those that are from them at the end of flexibility, just like the bones of the small animals.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and annects over the broken bone of all parts in some cause similar to glue in which it is thickened that adheres and strengthens that part that is enchanted and connected together, until venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, just like fire at the beginning, until some cause does not prevent that from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this cause it is necessary to place the bandages of the patient, bandages in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, just like we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Great variety of fracture according to variety of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the types of fractures are different according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the ribs is different from a fracture of the skull; and a fracture of the ribs is different from a fracture of the shoulder; and similarly, all other members are different from each other.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have remembered the memory of all types of fracture, explained in each separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Great variety of fractures in itself is a sign of illness.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The types of bone fractures are diverse in their appearances; for example, some are made by arches, others by stars; and some are made according to the length of the bone: and some fractures of the ribs, stars, and additions proceed and do not proceed, as is done in the pen when it is prepared to write, and the fracture is a breach and disruption in the skull, and the small fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each type of fracture, there is a particular pain in the restoration of it according to what will come from the memory of it in its separate places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Large swelling due to bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for that, it is known as a bone fracture: the swelling of it, and from that elevation and apprehension to the touch, and when you feel that at your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore, if there is no swelling or pain in the location and it does not make you wince when you touch the bone with agitation, and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is swelling or a small fissure, and you may feel it when you press your hand on it and compress the area; place something over it of the medicines of which you have remembrance appropriate at that moment; and keep it straight by subtle restriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you will know that the location when it is curved and not split into two or another, as it remains entirely in its place, then cover it with something that begins from your hour for rectification of the habitual that happens to it apostema caution.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess occurs, leave it open for several days until it stops oozing; then apply a poultice of equal parts of bread and milk.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you should know that the healing of the wound and its contraction is more difficult than that of the bone in which the injury occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then apply strength to the second one as it heals.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the bone is broken, it is necessary to extend this member, which is usually the leg or foot; or your hand if the member is small; or two cords or one cord and a hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place your hand in the position where you placed it, while the parts of the broken member are being extended; then apply pressure to those additions and pull them back into their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful not to hurt the patient with your operation or cause further injury; and apply the bone to the other as best as possible.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And if at that time you touch your hand on the patient's body and see any different cause, correct it and equalize it according to the amount of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And if you excessively extend and compress, as some foolish surgeons do when they move their hands, it can cause the accumulation of pus around the wound, or it can cause contraction in the member, as we have seen from their movements.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then attach, proper positioning and operation and structure of that member, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient on this and make him understand that he should not move that member during his watch and sleep, and see its rotation and agitation, and deal with its evacuation, and deal with all its movements with all his skill; and wait until the position of the member is a position in which pain is guaranteed, which causes it because when it is in the position of the member's injury; then cover that with another position of that which does not feel pain; and guard that that position of yours that member should be straight and equal, so that when it is restored, tortuosity does not occur.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the fracture in the limb is such as I have recommended, so you know that broken limbs vary in their appearance and size and shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, like the arm and the finger and similar to those, you should wrap them in very thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And for those that are large, like the mattress or the pillow, you should wrap them in a thick and strong wrapping, because the looseness of the wrapping strengthens the limb greatly and equally to all parts of the fracture, so that there is no gap.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then, start with equal evacuation, place a convenient bandage over that fracture, on the location of that fracture, with three or four layers after the limb has become slightly less swollen; and strengthen your hand by holding the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then, go to the most swollen part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen it so that your bandage does not tear the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then gradually extend your tongue into the area of the fracture, and slowly soften the structure until you reach a large portion of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other affected area over the fracture, and gradually bring the bandages to the part that has been left behind after the fracture; and your operation should be in the structure of the bandage and the softening of the second one that we mentioned in the first bandage.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place a cushion or cloth between the bandages that is equal to the twist of the fracture, if there is twisting; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place a cushion over the other bandage, and gradually equalize these sharp bandages as soon as possible, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area; and then place the cushion on the place where the abscess was and that reduces the inflammation; and leave it for several days; and then strengthen the bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And if the cane's handle is made of laurel wood, and well formed; or of pine; or of palm ribs; and let the width of each handle be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the star that is placed on that fracture should be thicker and longer than the others, and the length of the handle should be according to its size and proportion; and strengthen the other end with another bend according to your first structure; and then lay a cloth decently over it, as we have said about the structure, and that your structure should be according to the location of the fracture, and the longer it is from the fracture, the looser the structure.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is recommended that the threads be made of thin and subtle silk, and they should be of good quality; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of closing wounds with thick threads of cord, and this is a great error when catgut is used to make the structure equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And thin, sharp instruments are not suitable, because you will not be able to accurately cut what you want, and you will not avoid the risk of one puncturing another.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is lying flat on his back near the puncture site, then place a soft cloth or woolen blanket over him to prevent injury from that spot.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are accompanied by dislocations, and some occur in the spine, and you will find a membrane in that area.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that all broken bones do not require immediate immobilization; the reason for this is that when a bone is large, it does not need to be kept still on the splints until five or seven days later, according to your judgment of the risk of infection.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of splints that the Ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Translation: A plaster of a consistency similar to that used for the restoration of fractures, suitable for various complexions and especially for women and children, as it does not contain heat or humidity: you should take powder from ground molasses, and this is the medulla of the flour that you need to move the muscle in the sides of the moli.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	Translation: And if it is not present, then crush that which is in the same way, but grind this white of egg, and place the application on the unspoiled or delicate part; and use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Translation: Another plaster for the restoration of fractures, dislocations, and torsions: recipe of asafetida, of lapdanum, of acacia, of enula, and myrrh, which is made from milk thistle, all ana drac. x; of manna and aloe vera ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; all of their crushed and ground and mixed with water or with the white of egg if the complexion of the patient is scaly; and use this plaster, as it is of good composition and restores the broken bones more effectively, and confers to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another plaster for fractures and sprains: take marjoram, white wine, dragon's blood, and Armenian bole. X grams of marjoram, V grams of white wine, VI grams of dragon's blood, and XX grams of Armenian bole.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Grind all the ingredients in a large mortar with contrition, and their strainers, and their confits in water or albumen of egg, and administer it.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Plaster for joints and bones that are separated from their places, and for painful accidents in those and in fissures and fractures: take a piece of linen cloth and immerse it in VI vinegar and oil, and place it on the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this plaster, the virtue of restoration is not present, but it has the property of preventing and expelling pus and pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another plaster for restoring broken bones: take fig branches and wild poppy leaves, grind them all together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Hand plaster applied for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want to resolve a long-standing abscess: take aloe leaves, camomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of eggs, all mixed together and well kneaded; if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	However, if it is scalded, then apply this moistened colchicum or moistened water from it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another stronger plaster for the resolution of long-standing abscess than this first one, when it happens to the member: take leaves of aloe and seeds of lily, and balm, melissa, majorana, violet flowers, camomile, all mixed together and well kneaded; all of this is rubbed with water or milk or honey, depending on the quality of the member and its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, if you do not have Ypocras wine, then a wax and oil mixture should not be placed on the member's forehead for its restoration, but rather a cerote made of wax and oil; and it is recommended that it be thin between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May it be seen in Guyana that they are placed on the broken member for the restoration of it and the causes in which exsiccation is a little bit of heat so they have with mirrors, similar to their own causes that we have mentioned.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Recipe for a plaster that comforts the injury and pain: take equal parts of mallow, honey, peeled human skin or penis of an owl, aloe, salt; grind them with a mortar and pestle, and make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	If the amount is according to the kind of wound that was made and it is not displaced, consider if there is no pain or swelling and the bone is not broken, then you should not remove it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is pain, swelling, or inflammation at the location, then you should remove it in that hour, and apply the plaster to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a cloth and sea sponge of lion's mane moistened with water, and soak it in warm water until the swelling stops and the pain is relieved; then rest the member for an hour; then place a woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and olive oil or rose oil over it for one night until you are sure of the abscess being caut, and that the inflammation of the member has subsided, and that the pain of it has decreased.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then gently repeat that thin structure and apply a small and not too strong bandage for your first constraint, and gradually heal that which is sick.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and the pus and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents have already healed from everything, and you need to apply a bandage and a constraint, then you repeat what you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no harm comes to the member from those that we have said, then do not remove it but wait three days or four or five or six; and some of these days are left until twenty days after you appear by the removal of the member, as we have said, before the fracture adheres, and it settles on the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust in the constraint more than in your first constraint, and adjust in the swelling of the food of the patient, according to what precedes its remembrance.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you see that the location of the fracture has already dried up and become more exhausted than usual, then you know that the nourishment should not reach that place; therefore, apply a clean cloth soaked in warm water to that area for the entire day; and do this for three days; and gently loosen the bandage, and through this operation, the nourishment reaches the member, and it is healed more successfully.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	However, if the folk remedies for healing the broken member are applied at another time when it has not been restored to its original position, according to what is usual, and then restored according to its curvature, this is an error according to their operation, and great fear arises, and if that were done correctly, it would increase the ancient remedies in their freedom and would be better than that operation.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do that, so it is more reasonable that they do not do that.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter two: Of fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are varied, and their shapes are different, and their causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by a blow to the bone, which penetrates the entire bone, which is called the shaft, just like it does in the stick, and for this reason, this type of fracture is called an impacted fracture; or the blow enters a part of the bone, and enters the flesh but does not pass through to the back of the bone; and this type of fracture is called a complete absolute fracture.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the severity of these fractures is great or small, and the type of fracture whether it is contracted or dislocated; and the cause of this is a blow from a pole or a fall on stone, and similar circumstances.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating and approaches the periosteum which is behind the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And the type of fracture is that it is bent in the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and for this reason this special fracture is called hairline.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And the fracture is made by a blow or fall on stone, and similar circumstances, which causes some part of the bone to break into pieces, and it is made in the concave place where the ribs are when they are broken by their impact and the broken pieces enter the parts inside.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This is more commonly made in the bones of the human body, such as its ribs.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And these species of fractures are called simple, as they occur when bones separate from each other.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you would also find the cause of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you would also recognize all these species of fracture by detection on those and by inquiry about their causes and the corrupt flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And a special kind is recognized by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and it is removed, and it is applied to the injury, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider the symptoms of the patient at the beginning, and if you see by the symptoms that manifest themselves clearly due to the cause, such as vomiting from colic, extension, loss of understanding, abscess of the throat, fever, and swelling of the glands and pain in those parts, and similar to the symptoms of major dispositions, these are not cured.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you do not see any symptoms that do not correspond to the cause, then you hope for recovery, and then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	When the cause is that it has come to your leg in the beginning with the same pain and that is in the days of winter, then you should study in the position of the bone giving the day fourteenth, entirely disposed.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then you should study in the position of the bone giving the day seventh, having that which is left after the bone is corrupted by the pannicol, and that accidents which have happened.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the pannicol covering the brain, and it is small and atrophied, then you should study inscribed with the small and atrophied part, according to what I recommend to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you raise the head of the patient with the pain, and discover over the bone according to custom and your ability, according to the figure of the pain, and that it is lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you detect the bone, flow of pus or abscess carefully, then you should pause at the patient and that which is necessary, and that you fill the place of cloths infused in six and olive oil, and make a bandage over the pain until it is sedated the abscess, and be sure of flow of pus; and then begin in the circumference of the bone and in its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first method is that you insert the bone with a straight incisor tool, and this is the form of it: And then administer another incisor tool, slightly wider than the previous one; and this is the form of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then use the wider incisor tool.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should name different incisor tools, some of which are wider than others; and some of which are shorter than the others and have a sharp or dull edge at the end of their extremities, and they are made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion on the incisor tool so that you do not hit your head and cause injury to yourself.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should drill around it by using incisor tools called "taravals" which are not deep.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And these are not called anything else but those that do not penetrate the end of the bone to where it is located, so that the taravel has a rounded extremity or margin on that which is left of the sharp edge similar to the margin or a small circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the dense part of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is advisable to take many of these small needles that are suitable for the size of each bone, until it is present in all parts of the skull, the end of which should be sharp, the quantity in length and breadth according to the quantity of its size.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three kinds of needles: The quality of perforating in the circle of the fractured bone is that you place the needle on the bone and rotate it around its points until you know that the bone has penetrated; then move the needle to another location, and pause where the thickness of the ray or around it is.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert the small scissors that are between each fracture of the bone, and make it as thin as possible on top of it, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or your hand, or some other cause for the movement of those that will appear at this, as with fine tweezers and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be sure to guard against the scissors touching any cause of the skull.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so, when you have circled the bone that is perforated, and if it continues to be attached to the fascia, and you extract it, cover it with a cloth that is rough and unequal to the other instruments similar to an incisor, but rather more sharp and more subtle than the others.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there are any small fragments of bones and sharp edges, then take that one with difficulty from the instruments; and approach it to cure the wound with linen and find the ones we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is very long and frightening, which Gualia and Laurez call great; and this is the word of it: it is necessary for you to begin by discovering the part of the bone in which the fracture is most violent and most manifest, before you have discovered that part and placed behind it the end of this slow and cheerful incisor, which is the form of it.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And if the lens-shaped part is not indented and does not cause any problem, and the sharp part is located two centimeters apart in length, as often; then adjust the lens-shaped part to the cipher at the face of the sharp part entering the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then perforate the bone with a small needle into which you can insert the entire bone for ease of movement, and be sure that the tendon does not get injured in any way, and if the medicine14 was the most powerful of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if it was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If any attached cause to the tendon is found in other locations of the bone, then insert that into the lens-shaped part at the end of the needle, and release that from the bone with ease, which is released from its harm and its fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the tendon, and what is cut or stuck to the bone is the face of that, and it is in the roughness and subtle scratches, then remove that roughness and remove those scratches with a fine razor that you have prepared from various amounts so that you can administer them in the most convenient places of theirs and the most correct of those after that in which you lost your operation that bone was broken and the shape of that.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you should give in your reason the one that makes you believe that it is the best, and then use it appropriately near that place, and do not stop doing that until you reach administering the thinnest part of all those razors.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In each of the other small cracks and thin fractures, you should give treatment according to what you lost for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is not caused by all those that have been studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And it is based on what we have shown in large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the skin is stretched when you remove the bones, then you should take cloth of the same quantity as the wound, and immerse it in rosinated oil, and place it on the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and immerse it in vinegar and oil, and place it on the first cloth, and do that as well as you can over that, without pressing it; and then administer a thin layer of linen, and do not press it except for the amount that the wound has, only enough to hold it together.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Let this man rest from this cure for a day or two until it is certain that the abscess has been cautiously treated; and then remove him and administer medicines that are excessively moistening, such as linseed and flour of eggs, and powder of myrrh and aristolochia, and similar things to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And if you make these medicines into powder that is ground on the surface, as they are dry; and generally, administer all of this medicine of property that is to remove but not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard yourself that the wound in your cure is not raw; and it is not in the deafness of tongue or another; nor do you allow to aggregate virulence in it; because when it is adjusted on the brain's panniculus, corrupts that and pores that, and happens above the patient that malice malignant.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And happen in the head's skull, as from it is modified the bone and much when it is thinned the cure of it, and it is black on the surface of it; and therefore consider now if it happens to the patient those accidents that we have said, know that it is dangerous for all.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If no other medicine has been used except for the one placed above, and it is effective in treating that blackness, then take a piece of honey and four pieces of olive oil, and place those lines on a cloth, and place that over the affected area; and cure that with the specific treatments that are appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You should know that the nose is not broken into two pieces evenly, but rather one of those certain angles, because in it there are two bones, where the part that is left is cartilaginous, and it does not break and does not affect it except for its angle, tortuosity, and swelling.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two pieces is broken, then you should introduce the other piece into its own nose, and equalize that fracture with the opposite side, until it returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And this should be done by you for your own convenience, and be careful not to disturb the patient during your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not permit it, then apply pressure to the end of the bone where there is a small swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the same.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And bring the patient to the first day of the fracture for restoration, if possible; otherwise, then apply the seventh or tenth degree of the cauterizing agent.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or place two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and it should be so thick that it fills the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And it is said of the ancient restorers that the splints should be wrapped in bandages and changed every day, but I have not seen this; however, it is recommended that the cloth be wrapped in a piece of waxed paper to keep the bone from moving.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes a splint should be inserted into the nose, in place of the calga, or covered with a cloth from the lion; and that you have not broken the fracture of the nose too violently, and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, make calgas.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another splint is necessary, apply it to the nose with beeswax or with a mixture of quicklime and rose oil, or with diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if no splint is necessary, then cover that deformed part with a mixture of starch and powdered chalk from the white of an egg; and place your hand on the lion's skin to prevent the nose from being deformed.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken or crushed at the fracture, then cover them with a mixture that is appropriate for those; and close the wound, and heal it with what is suitable, and apply appropriate bandages.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If there is a problem with the nose, then apply warm compresses and administer a catheter with a tube to relieve it completely.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture does not cause pain, look if the fracture is only deformed and not completely broken into two pieces, and is curved to the parts inside, then it is not serious.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is in the middle, then insert your finger into the patient's mouth on the left side; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right side, then insert the same finger into the patient's mouth on the right side; and push it against the part of the fracture inside, and your other hand on the part of the deformed bone; and gradually equalize them.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw has already been separated into two pieces, then apply traction on both parts in a straight line until it is possible to equalize them.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If teeth are dislodged and disrupted, then you should hope that they remain attached to the gold wire or silver wire or silk; and place a piece of cloth over the broken jaw, and place a doubled cloth over it, and place a large stiff cloth decently on it, or a weight equal to the length of the jaw; and hang it above according to how you have prepared the support and what is suitable for the application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be calm, and place a soothing drink in their mouth.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then on the third day you should take it off and apply what is already altered to the wound with powder of milk, album of egg, or flour of cinnamon, before you have placed the plaster on it, and place a lion's wool bandage over it.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then with this annex and adjust the plaster to it, and if the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it until it is healed and strong; for this fracture is usually healed in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another complication occurs, such as an abscess, then administer the same medication that we have mentioned for other complications in their bedrest until they are healed, and that abscess remains.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is severe, then consider whether the separated bone is broken or not, and if it is not broken, then use the same method that is appropriate for removing those bones from the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the holes of the wound are narrow, then use the forceps according to the amount of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have set those broken bones, and if they do not remain in place, then enlarge the holes of the wound; and if they are not wide enough, then place one of the appropriate bandages on that area and keep it there until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the scapula when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The scapula is broken in the part near the shoulder, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When the bone is broken, separated, or separated into two parts that do not match; and it is easier to restore; or if there are fragments in the wound, and it is difficult to restore; or if the fracture is complex.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is complex, is to have two assistants, so that one holds the broken bone and follows the broken ribs, and the other stretches the neck towards that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then align the fracture with the ribs until it is shaped like the second rib, and not in the prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if more extension is needed, then cover the patient's chest with cloth or wool, and make the size of it according to the amount of your need; extend and elevate the broken rib and tie it with your hand until the fracture is aligned as desired.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot tie the end of the rib to the broken parts, so that it does not reach the neck, then cover the patient with a cushion larger in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant priest pulls the muscle of the patient from the parts that were previously entered, so that the bone of the furcula is raised to be in the position on top, and then you correct the fracture and equal it to those mentioned above.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	However, if you feel pain in the furcula and its muscles, then cover that area and remove those pains for ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is held in the bone, then you make an incision on that area with one of the scissors that you have prepared for that purpose, after having placed the instrument that serves the chisel; and this instrument is a hammer or a hammer of which this is the form of it:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a carpenter's hammer of which this is the concavity; and its length should be according to that which you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the softness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	However, the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; that there should be two ends with which, one end being wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you incised when you extracted the bone fragment is wide, and it is sure to become an abscess, then adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear an abscess, then fill the wound with gauze and powders according to the size of the wound's incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess forms, then pour in warm water and apply a cloth soaked in oil and warm water, and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the structure of the bone when it is wounded and cut, be that you place an ointment made of flour of milled wheat and egg white on it, and place it over the lion's head, and place the sphere behind the bone's tip, if necessary, and take humidified cotton, which is long and as wide as a palm or slightly more; and place powdered duplicates over the ointment and the bandage; and take a thin tablecloth of which the width is three fingers and in length similarly; and wrap that in cloth, and wrap that cloth with the tablecloth over the location of the fracture; and place humidified cotton as it unrolls, and roll it around the bone's neck and behind the bone's tip, and reduce it to all parts, and when the structure of the fracture descends, and that is what is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And even if the metal plate above the broken bone is not removed; and in order for you to see that the patient's condition improves each day, when the bandage becomes soft or you see that the plate is no longer needed, then you should straighten it and strengthen the bone.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's pillow on their back, and place another pillow under their arm to support their arm in the new position; so that the assistant can raise the broken part of the clavicle to the level of the muscle; or hold their arm against their chest.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage unless an abscess forms in the wound within 12 days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you see that it has become loose at that location, and adjust it to fit the bone and restore it until it is healed and the broken part of the clavicle is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it should be strengthened and made comfortable according to the wound in 28 days, and some people have it done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of a broken shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The splint is broken at the back of the shoulder and not broken in the middle, but only on the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the place of the shoulder is broken - and it is broken in the middle - and it is not known except by touch, according to the figure of the fracture, prepare the splint and reduce it according to the natural figure in any way possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And place your hand over the powdered bone of alum and lion; and place a rolled cloth on it; and place a thin layer of table salt according to the amount of the splint or more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the layer is concave at any point of the splint, then level that concavity with lion's mane, and place the layer according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And place a strong bandage above the wet layer according to proper tightness and firmness of the layer until it does not remain in its own place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament in each day; and all the time it is softened, tie another ligature and strengthen it and equal the style if it remains in its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the patient on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spoon is restored in 10 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligature, and make sure that it is not from the bones of which the beginning was not feared or its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the bone of the foot and place it behind the heel, then you cut it on it, and stop it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio de apostema caut if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The chest is sometimes broken in the middle of it and that ends here; but the extremities of it are somewhat bent and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And when the leg is broken, it declines to the parts of the foot and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, and strong fever and vomiting; and it is declared in the cavity of the bone broken and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of the leg is to lie the patient on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulder blades; and then press on the muscles of the leg, adjust the ribs of the leg to two straight lines, and carefully perform the operation of the leg and maintain its balance according to all possible methods that are suitable for it, until the figure of the bone returns as it was before.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place a poultice and bandage over the broken leg on a thin tablecloth or calendered cloth, so that you wrap it in a cloth; and carefully apply the poultice to the broken bone so that it is not maggot-ridden; and go to the wound as soon as it has softened, and strengthen it with stricture. And consider the wound throughout the hour, and when it is softened, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to remove the bandage or plaster that has caused irritation, pain, or an abscess in the area, then you should remove and discard it, eradicate the ointment, and rectify the condition using a suitable method of treatment; and if it is necessary to reapply the ointment, do so according to its application.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You should know that rib fractures do not occur in the broader parts of the ribs, but only in their narrower parts, which are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And you should not be afraid to examine the patient's ribs during the inspection of the patient and the described symptoms.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The restoration should be such that it matches the fracture described above, as much as possible, until it is healed, and then apply ointment and strengthen the broken bone according to this method.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the rib fracture is inclined towards the internal parts, the patient experiences severe pain and puncture, similar to the puncture experienced by someone who has coughed, and because of this, the bones are covered with a cloth; and this causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood, which is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ancients used to treat that with a large amount of ointment.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they said: cover the patient's abdomen with a cloth that causes inflammation and heat, so that the abdomen is full and stretched, and the fracture is pushed towards the external parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We do not advise this unless it is not the cause of generating an abscess, if it does not happen; and if it has already happened, then we help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they said to him that it should be placed above the wound and that it should suck strongly; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the drain will draw too much fluid to the area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they said to them: cover that place with a woolen cloth that has been previously soaked in hot oil, and place powder between their ribs until it is full, which is the same as when you apply the second plaster; and then cure the patient with the care of pleurisy of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient suffers from severe constriction that they have not experienced before, and the bones puncture the veins, then cover them with a cloth over the patient, tear open the torn costa, and place your hand on top of the instrument that contains the cipher, the remembrance of which is preceded, and cut the bones to facilitate its removal.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then they should adjust the loose lips of the wound, if it is large, with a bandage, and cure it with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess forms, then you should cover it and insert powder in hot oil and place it on the wound, and cure the patient with that which covers the abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him lie on his left side while he is healing.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	About the restoration of the fracture of the sacrum and backbone.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some wounds can lead to fractures in the bones of the neck and back, and they are often accompanied by injuries to their surrounding tissues, similarly to the sacrum of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when such an accident happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, consider this: if their muscles are already softened, stunned, and dead, and they cannot move or stretch those muscles, and when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they feel no pain in those areas, then know that they will not be healed, and in such cases the prognosis is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they feel pain in those areas when pressed or pricked, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will likely recover.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see similar symptoms in the backbone of the neck and want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you see that it has already become soft, if you notice that those things happen in the muscles, and when it is on its back, it becomes constipated and unable to urinate, and some people lie on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and therefore do not treat it.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If none of those things happen, the cause is better and less dangerous.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment of it is to perforate the abscess with a needle that you place on the spine, or with some drops of olive oil and rose water; place some people on top of it until the abscess is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the plasters that are comforting and existing, and strengthen on that one; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the part where the pain occurs until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the tissue of the bone is separated from it, then cover it with a bandage and cast that bone; and adjust the edges of the wound, with stitches if it is large; and cure it with some ointment, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the back of the knee is broken, and it is the end of the thigh, then enter your left hand into the anus, and equalize the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible; and place a bandage and splint over it, if necessary, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken bones in it, then treat that, and stop that, and cure the wound with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the restoration of the anus.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the anus are broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is only communication in the extremities of those and they are inserted in the length and decline to the parts inside; and the patient feels pain in that place and puncture, and the cushion is surprised when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it so that it is over the fracture, which is its figure.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is only at the end of it, then you should equalize the second one that you have on your hand to the first, so that it is evenly distributed between them and is similar to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the long bone or that has already declined to the parts below, then you should make the patient lie on their back between them and prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have equalized it, place your hand on the plaster, and place another hand on that star of wood or of cord, and strengthen the structure on which you do not fear puncture of fracture or removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And equalize the concavity of that which is placed in the place where that fracture has been restored by the structure according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if there is an abscess, then you should stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and place another on that which precedes it; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen that which has a cover.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if there are fractures or bones that are crushed, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11:
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the supporter.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	This is the part that is between the ribs and under the shoulder blade.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you grasp with your hand as follows:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And if it is attached to the two ends of two ribs, then lift it up from the place and suspend it.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a stool; and lift up the broken arm over the chair until it reaches the tip of the shoulder, in the middle place where the curve of the chair is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And suspend it over that heavy object, or the nurse extends it to the parts behind; and the surgeon places the fracture in its place again, until the fracture returns as it was.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other servant should place the patient on their back and support their head with a pillow; then command two ministers to hold one under the fracture, and the other behind them; and each of them should extend their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then apply pressure on the fracture with the pillow and on the other pillow, and each of the two ministers should extend their parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then place half of the pillow on the wound and the other behind the fracture to protect it.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly, if the fracture is near the wound, then place the pillow on that location and on the wound.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Equalize it with the wound and its surroundings, and when it is well equalized according to what should be applied by good application, then apply pressure to prevent post-traumatic infection carefully.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If an abscess occurs, leave the restriction inside for seven days, and place a poultice made of bread crust soaked in vinegar and oil on it until it heals, and then apply that again.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of applying that is to place a plaster on the fracture, and then cover it with a clean cloth; then adjust the arm on this supporter, and place your hand on their muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Then cover the cloth and apply pressure on the arm supporter to keep the arm in place, unless there is any reason not to do so due to the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And place the splint that is farthest and strongest among the others over the fracture; and between each splint, place a layer of the same thickness as the splints, which should be three inches long on each side.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then apply pressure to the splints and the restriction that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is necessary for your structure to be placed more straightly on the location of the fracture.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture becomes longer, the structure should be smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you see the position of the pins and the structure as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its proper position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear infection, then leave the structure and the pins inside for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that it does not occur in the wrong location or inflammation; or eating is prohibited to come to the member because of the disposition of excessive structure; and therefore, correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are sure that nothing of this happens, then do not remove the bandage for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And the patient's head should be on their back, and their hands should be over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place your hand over the helper full of wool equally, and consider in every hour of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not torn or dissolved, or that the bandage is softened, therefore correct everything according to your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Pause the patient's meal according to the order we have given before, unless the meal is too subtle in the beginning until it starts to strengthen; and then cover that with a cloth.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	It is customary for the helper and the servant to be strengthened in ten days; and then cover them with a cloth, and give them a bath and medicate them with the remedies that correct that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is not healed after that time, then you should not remove the bandage and the splints within one day or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is composed of two bones that are called two branches; one is small, and it is the one that is called the wrist, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed below the small one, from the elbow downwards.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the larger branch is broken alone, or the smaller one, and if they are both broken at once.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small intestine is cut above, its restoration would be more difficult, and its healing would be more difficult.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the large intestine is cut below the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse when two bones are broken.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is cut above the small intestine, it is advisable for the doctor to facilitate the restoration of it by placing a small extension.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large intestine is that which is cut, then place a more forceful extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both intestines are cut, then place a stronger extension.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And place the hand of the doctor on the abdomen for the restoration of it and extend the extension over a cushion, and the feet of the patient should be above all others, and the ear should be lower than the others, and the patient should lie on a flat bed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion under the patient's head or back to prevent them from moving.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the assistant extends their arm on the side of the patient that is farthest from their hand or clothing, and another assistant does the same on the other side.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the doctor straightens the bones as much as possible according to the best figure that can be achieved.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are nails in the bone fracture, then carefully remove all of them from their place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there is a nail that has entered and cannot be hoped for in the restoration of it, then do as we mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is in the thigh, you have already taken care of that specific case, and therefore take care of that cure.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth made of roasted oil and white wax between subtlety and delicacy, and strengthen the cloth over that thin structure until the abscess is cured; and then remove the wax and place an ointment prepared from ground moli and clarified honey, and place a poultice. And let the cloth that is placed on that fracture be as close to it as possible and as strong as possible.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the number of bones in the arm is found in its major positions, or if it is a fracture in one or two places at once.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your bandage most firmly and forcefully over the location of the fracture, and when more of the bandage is above or below the fracture, place it more gently than it was previously mentioned in the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft cloths, not hard or sharp, and the best one is the one that can be moved easily between being thin and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and its position close to those days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs of which correction is necessary, as previously mentioned for that member, and then make sure that you introduce the member into water before that problem stops.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And do not keep the member inside until it becomes painful, and then return the bandage.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the contraction has already been softened and the bone has regained its shape and appearance like those, then straighten all of that with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive swelling, then gently loosen that one and lay it aside for several days until the nourishment reaches it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if no cause of those things has occurred to the patient within about 20 days or around that time, then do not allow it to be discharged.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And have the hand of the patient suspended over them by their skill in moving and make them sleep on their side.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you should know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or if it is very severe, it is restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the condition of the body and the skill of the healer.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the little finger and those like it.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You should know that the pinch of the thigh and the ankles of those who have the mentioned tart end with a fracture, and do not touch them except for certain very small movements.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when you touch the patient's fracture or injury, make sure that the patient is lying flat and evenly on their back, and place your hand over the affected area extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then, the assistant extends the broken bones and the doctor holds those that are connected well with good concavity.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And make sure that the bandage and the poultice are applied, but do not touch the abscess carefully; and place your hand over it according to the size of the area, and you have already covered it with a cloth of linen.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the splint is in the parts of the abdomen, and make it similar to a cloth, and command the patient to press that on their abdomen splinted; then strengthen the cloth long.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the cushion of the body should be in the cloth where it is lifted, so that the body is applied to the palm; and strengthen it according to what is covered.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the parts that are deformed, then place your hand under and above the part of the bone, so that the muscle is opened and straightened; and then place the structure, as the hand is rolled between the mentioned ribs.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if the fracture occurs in one of the joints of the mentioned bones, then if it is said to be a sprain, equalize and strengthen the hand on the palm and if you wish, place a small straight object under it so that the fracture is elevated and not deformed.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other mentioned joints, such as in the wrist, or elbow, or ear, or ring finger, then equalize and strengthen the hand on the palm of that joint; or all are tied together continuously, which is better; or place it over that small straight object, as we have said in the wrist.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and apply that, the disposition of abscess cauterization and opposition — at the operation — at that which covers when any cause of those occurs, according to what is repeated about it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the bone in the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh are broken and it is declared to the second sense that it becomes in the part indicated and in the most inferior.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the ligament is stretched over the fracture and another ligament after the fracture, and the patient lies on their back and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the surgeon stretches all the ligament to its indicated part, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is towards the upper part of the thigh, then the ligament should be placed at the end of the femur to the indicated part, so that the extension can be in its place, and the other ligament after the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is towards the lower part of the thigh, then the ligament should be placed at the end of the femur to the indicated part, and the extension should be at the parts after.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor gently moves the bones that are out of place back into their natural position and joins them with a good joint; then cover the area and apply a bandage, unless there is an abscess in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	However, if there is an abscess in the member, then leave it alone for a few days until the abscess has drained, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage of the member should be made as follows: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and fold it twice or three times, and then leave some excess; and then cover the area between the thigh and the buttock.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And then insert a long thin strip of cloth between the buttock and the bandage from the denuded area to the other parts, and then bring the ends of the strip over the top of the two parts, and then wrap it around the bandage and the buttock to cover any excess.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place your hand on the buttock in the location of the fracture, and place a splint over the bones of the bandage.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the empty spaces between the couch and the cushion with multiple folded cloths, to prevent the wound from becoming infected.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin the bandaging from the center of the wound over the area of the fracture with three or four layers, and the more you approach the edge of the wound, your bandage should be thinner and lighter and moister.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend two ends of the bandage to the parts where it reaches the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the strips on the other side to prevent the bandage from slipping off its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then lay the bandage over that, so that it does not cause corrosion or abscess or inflammation and similar things to the member; and if any of those causes occur, then count on removing the bandage and correcting what has happened as soon as possible, according to the methods we have mentioned.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is broken and you cannot align it according to what is possible for you, then leave it as it is and bandage it again, and cure that which is preceded by the remembrance of when it was healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes certain bandages are used to strengthen this fracture of the ribs or other adjustments that are suitable for the ribs, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in the restoration of the patient in such a way that this does not happen to the patient who is suffering from paralysis; and if it is restored alone, another thing should be applied to the other cushion, then it is necessary that he paralyzed one should quickly be placed.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the rib is strengthened in eleven days or a few more or a few months, and all of this depends on the variety of the conditions and the other arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the collarbone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that the fracture of the collarbone heals quickly, but it does not happen to the other bandages.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it happens to the fracture, then it is only a crack or tear in its parts, and this is called a splint or several splints, and over it all is placed by the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the broken parts should be equal to what was torn from the patient's body, and it should be added and joined together as much as possible for equality, ease, and manufacturing.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then place a poultice and place it on that round stone, if necessary for that one; and stretch it tightly over the wound.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then consider all the arrangements that we have recommended for other fractures, as well as abscesses and similar things that should be placed on the whole accident according to what is suitable for him to be healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the ribs there are two bones of which one is large and is called the rib; and the other is thin and is called the costal.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And according to the type of fracture that has occurred in both bones of the arm, and for that reason, the restoration of the arm is done similarly, and the operation of the arm is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken at once, the pillow is turned to all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if a more delicate bone is broken, the pillow is turned to the dental parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if a larger bone is broken, then take it away, and this is one of those causes that you have not yet understood.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension and equality and ligature of the wounds according to that proportion.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the bone is not healed by the time there are no more signs of swelling, then the extension should be less and looser, and it will help your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the arm, there is a cause for an operation if you equalize the wounds and complete the entire operation, then you will take weights of iron that are placed next to the causes that are placed on the soles, and they are made entirely of white palm leaves; aligned with those that have small roughness, and not like the hands, and it should be the longest of those according to the length of the arm, and the deepest into the most distal part.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each in a blanket of two folds according to its length, and place one on the part of the cushion of the one side and the other on the other side, and the end under the lowest part of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the three blankets in three places of the extremities and at the middle, so that this structure the cushion is prohibited to tilt to the right and left side, and it is in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a cushion of wood according to the length of the cushion is administered; and it is placed on the cushion to keep that of movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially be careful that you do this in fracture, and when it is placed properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the cushion each day and study that which is behind to study, and you guard it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and if something happens of those, then stop at that which is proper before it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus and the bones of the foot and those called.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	No fracture occurs in the talus as a whole; rather, some fractures occur in the bones of the foot; and those called are rarely fractured, and do not occur in them except occasionally in their arrangement.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot are fractured and sometimes those bones are raised above themselves between them, then the patient is placed on his side on the prepared ground as if he were walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot on that which is raised from those bones, and press them, and equalize them until they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then place a bandage and splint above, and place a small table under the patient's belly with two flat surfaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that bandage with the patient's leg and structure descent, because you have wrapped it with cloth and other causes of which it is necessary.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And if the patient has passed three or four days, then you remove the bandage, as you will find the bones in equal proportions, or they are fractured or dislocated, and the operation in those cases is with traction.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if he says they are fractured, then you restore those, and level them with each other, and tell him about the restoration of the said bones in the manual.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the second fractured bone along its length, and another one next to it; and then place this table on the foot, which was recommended to you, and strengthen that joint with a decent restriction.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if that fracture of the bones is two or three or more, then you place each bone on its length covered in lion cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and let one of the caps of the table stand on the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is advisable for you not to forget that you do not consider all the causes which were told to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have mentioned; and pause at all accidents, what covers it.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the jawbone, the bone of the patella, and the clavicle of man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the jawbone is fractured, then perform that surgery in a crouched position, and approach it to the part of the back a little, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife should place her hand on the jawbone of the neck, and do the same as before; and then the jawbone should be struck gently, and the little one's head should be raised little by little, until the part of the jawbone is found as before and the fractured bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powders on the little one's back, and when he wants to urinate remove them gently and allow him to urinate, and reduce and return that second as before, and then return to the first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around those days, until he is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take an egg from the hen and strengthen it on the mouth of a syringe; then insert the entire egg into the wound, and blow through the syringe until the egg is inflated with its contents, as the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with warmth and rest for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bones of the pelvis of a man or woman are broken, then administer in the healing and needling of that bone, as we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is drained should not be hidden in these nearby fractures and should not be given to just anyone, but rather to someone who has some knowledge and understanding of this my free book; for that fracture signifies to you in the greatest dispositions via dryness in the healing and structure of that bone, and therefore understand it.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the wound of a man when it is broken, take wheat flour, and put the wound in that; and place your hand over it wrapped in cloth, and let it be covered, and let it lie for three days or around those, and let it be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of bone fractures when they are displaced.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the person who has suffered a displaced fracture, and especially if the bone is large as those of the thigh or shoulder, or similar to those, that you first check and perform reduction as soon as the conditions for reduction are present, as we have previously mentioned.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the displacement does not occur immediately, then you should check that you retain the bone in its place, and if there is another cause, then powder it with three grains of sulfur.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And when you begin to restore the fracture on that day, do not prolong it, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	However, if an abscess occurs, then you should leave the restoration of the bone until the ninth day, within which time the abscess will have subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause more harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the bone is fractured and exposed above the heel, then carefully reduce that and equalize it with your fingers, making it easier and shorter extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not prepared and the balance of it with your fingers, then reduce that with this tool; and this tool is made of iron, its length being seven or eight ditz, and its width according to the size of the wound; and for that, it is necessary for the doctor to have three or four of these according to the amount needed in treatment for all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And if it is round, and is in the small greasy part so that it is not folded during the operation, then place the gauze over that.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And if it is sharp at the end where there is a margin on its other ends; and if it is under that, it should be thick at the top and thin at the bottom, entering into the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means a little palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the patient's arm can be placed on the edge of the bed with its elbow raised above the edge of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push it into a cushion that returns the bone, and make it equal to some balance.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then try to equalize the limbs of the fracture between them, and if the limb of the patient is broken and thin, and you do not take that tool for good reason, then try to insert the limb of that bone into where the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone to all of that which we have recommended, then insert that bone into where the scissors or saw that we have mentioned can be used; or use a saw on that bone in some way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then remove those that are in the bone of roughness and small scratches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and if the patient has great pain during the reduction, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you consult with the patient about greatly.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your bone fracture is fully healed, apply a sterile black adhesive bandage to it, especially in summer, and do not place it over a wound or any other cause where it could cause further injury and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stelas at the time of the patient's complementary bone healing, and leave the wound exposed to the air unless it is inscribed with the trauma and used with bandages according to the amount of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to expose the wound to the fracture, as it can cause further injury, as has been done by some doctors, and it can lead to death or serious harm, such as infection or gangrene.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the patient's structure is loose, soft, and different from the structure of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear those bad accidents that we have mentioned, and cause severe pain in the area, then do not place it over those bandages, but instead use that dressing of hard cloth in place of stelas and press it against those areas.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the pain starts to occur one or two days later, where it is generating heat, then you remove the cloth that you had placed on that part, and administer lotions, using those that according to our custom are used to treat wounds, such as tetrapharmacon and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is agreed with you that you remove the bandage and consider the wound on each day at matins and vespers until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus runs out of it to the parts behind for ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound has passed several days and it is not consolidated or drained of pus from it, then you know that here are signs of smallpox, so inquire about the wound to determine if it is smallpox.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those signs, those that remain separated and extruded, those that do not separate and put the member and cause pain to pierce those that are possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If the wound becomes infected with a specific type of corruption or putrefaction, then place on it one of those remedies that are suitable for that disease, as described in its own chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And about that remedy in which you place your poultice: when the large pieces are crushed, raise it over the member that is there, like the bones of the cushion and the helper, and similar to those of the large members, and do not assume attraction or extraction of it, as many accidents can occur because of this remedy, which may cause death; leave that in place for about 20 days or 30 days; and later cure the wound if you see it, and if not, leave it there.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure of a nodosities that occur in the tissues of some fractures.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many accidents can occur in the tissues of this nodosities at the site of fracture healing, and more so near the joints, and it is formed by the figure of the member; and very often prevent the member from performing its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the wound is recent and administer those medicines that have been used in such cases with aloe, and honey, and marjoram, and serracollo, and thickening, and similar to those; taking some or all of them, and confirm those as astringent, or album of cow's milk, or astringent honey, and place that on the wound in a cloth, and bind it well.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And loosen the bandage that does not cause pain for several days; and remove it and apply another, until the wound is healed; or strengthen it on that piece of plaster, which has the property of maintaining everything that is inflated in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the wound has become hard and tight and it is necessary to cause an abscess in that place, then divide that part of the wound that is most raised from it, and scrape off the excess and inflamed, or rub that with a rezor until it is healed; and cure it before it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the broken bone is restored and placed back in its original position, it should not be too thin or fragile.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored and the limb is too thin or fragile, this should not be done for many reasons: one of which is the lack of solution to the ligament and tendon of the broken bone, which is not healed according to its own nature; or excessive strictness of the ligaments that prevent nutrients from reaching the limb; or excessive use of ointment; or excessive movement at a time when it should not be done; or weakness in the patient's body and weakening of the limb.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to massage the patient and make the limb move gently within the time when the wound is multiplying; and administer baths; and apply gauze and lettuce on it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place a bandage on the limb, so that the bandage draws out the most nutrients, or continuous application of ointment with water tea, until the nutrient reaches and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Concerning the treatment of broken bones when they are healing properly and preventing their operation at that time.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When an injury occurs to a member that has already been healed, the swelling and elevation of the broken bone and the formation of a lump should be treated in the shape of the limb, but if the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, you should not accept the word of someone who claims that the member is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	However, many foolish doctors and restorers have done this in our time; and this operation is so detestable that it causes great fear of the one which is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	However, if swelling and lumps are recent, it is recommended to apply hot water in which softening herbs are steeped, such as elderflowers and chamomile, and similar ones; and this should be done with the ointment made of mollifying ointment, such as diallaquel well made; or it should be pressed with powder of chamomile and smeared with goose grease or oil of crambe, and this should be applied to that.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some warts are dissolved by frequent application of a lighter ointment that is very moist, and it should be applied to the entire limb at all parts in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the twisting has already become so severe that it is very strong and becomes a stone and causes the need for surgery with a knife, then it is necessary to remove the pus from the wound and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and shave off any excess bone with a small saw, and apply some remedy to facilitate that in that pain and difficulty.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On speech about dislocations.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is an injury to one of its joints, so it is prohibited from moving, and the figure of the limb is distorted, and brings pain and great injuries to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when an injury occurs in dislocation, it is necessary to reduce it as soon as possible, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very painful, and it is difficult to reduce the dislocation at that time.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And to avoid any harm or stretching during the hour of abscess formation, as the swollen parts cause spasms and slow pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When that happens, you should cover yourself with the patient's cloak, and let it rest until the abscess is ready to be opened; then treat the member with hot water and oil, and reduce it with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all members should be treated with the water that will bring back their memory to their place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already arranged the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the top of the shoulder, bring it up to the top of the shoulder that was lowered.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter .xxiv.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the cure of jaw dislocation below.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated jaws, if not treated; and the dislocation of others is made in one of two ways: either they are rearranged from their places by slight removal, and become slightly molded; or they are completely dislocated and completed, within which they are molded at the part of the joint where the saliva of the patient flows and which cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and the tongue of him is wrapped in his palate.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of it is not severe, then return it to its major positions to prevent further injury.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and total, then apply reduction of it gradually, and do not delay for too long.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And if the healer has the patient's head, and inserts the finger of the one hand in the mouth of the patient, on the side of the dislocation of the jaw, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts both fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other hand holds the jaws of the patient; and commands the patient to cease his jaws and remove those from each part; and the healer equalizes the jaw and pushes the jaw back into its place before it returns to its original position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, then apply evaporation with water and oil, before gradually reducing both and do not delay the reduction of both for too long, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so when we return and she is lying down, her mouth is closed and not softened, then place a poultice of cloth moistened with wax and rose oil on those powders; and it should be applied to facilitate the movement of the limbs.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And the patient's head should be placed on a pillow between two cushions, so that it does not press against the midline or the left side; and do not force any cause without their consent; having the same vision, then remove that which is forbidden, before the pain returns and the jaws are unlocked, then do what you will.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And that should be administered with ease, and do not force it through the opening of the mouth for food, drink, or defecation, until the jaw is unlocked and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws at an hour when they are not converted to their usual places, then apply warm compresses and frequent soda, and strengthen the abdomen of the patient, and frequently and forcefully vomit.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see that, you will know it is bad; and those who have experienced such an event usually die within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25:
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from the back of the neck due to its connection with the chest; and some people are dislocated at the front part, and that is called dislocation in the shoulder.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then firmly grasp the area with your hand, with strong grip, so that it returns.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place a poultice and powders on that, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	If the extremity of that which is bent and continues in that way is not dislocated on any day, then you should reduce and bandage it according to what we have said and according to what is available to you.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place a poultice, powders, and compression, and command the patient to rest in quiet until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And this method of treatment reduces the extension of the muscle when it is separated from its own location.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the acromion to the ribs.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle, and this is done sharply; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated below by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most commonly dislocated and deformed and appears at the acromion behind the shoulder, and especially in those in which the flesh is thin, more easily comes out; but in those in which there are thick flesh, it is more difficult to come out.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And many men have suffered from trauma or injury to the muscles, and the muscles of the affected area become infected with abscess, and they are lamed because of that which has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, first of all, you should seek to understand that which is over and above your knowledge about it, and then proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is known when you shake the parts behind it; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the undislocated muscle, because there are differences manifest between them; and you should feel in the hollow of the muscle cap, and behind the shaking, touch the cap of the muscle as if with a bone, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to its natural position, nor move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you should apply pressure or traction, and then you should feel for it with a manifest touch, and it should not be hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, a false reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises his hand to the parts above; and then places his fingers below the tendon of the foot, and elevates the joint with strength in its proper place, and the minister raises his hand, and extends it there; and then places it behind where it returns naturally.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If it does not return, and from the beginning of the dislocation, for several days, the patient should be given an infusion that softens and loosens, such as if their joints were made of high grass, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back and supported below the tendon of the foot with wool that is equal to flexibility and resistance, and the doctor places his hand on the sole, and elevates the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it does not slip behind, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not slip behind, for then it returns to its proper place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and stand on the side of that one, and insert his muscle behind the patient's rib cage and raise the patient's rib cage to the parts above where the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from behind their belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is lighter, then cover it with another cause that is suspended, so that it does not pull, because the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in another manner: and it is that there should be a long bench on the ground with a round shape, like a mortar, which is not too thick or thin, and placed behind the patient; so that it is placed over the top of the bench, cover the patient with leather lions, and the patient stands according to the length of the bench, and extend their arm from the other part; and extend the joints of the other part with strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If it is difficult to reduce the hernia due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this cure: and you should take a cloth of the length of two arms, and its width of four fingers, and the heaviest part of the hernia should be placed at the tip of the second finger in this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place a red cloth over the head to prevent the hernia from descending on the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place your hand or arm over the hernia through the parts behind it, and tie the cloth to the assistant's hand and arm and the end of your hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then place your arm on a step ladder according to its width, and your hand should be extended behind it, and the other thing should be suspended from the other side, where the joint enters quickly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the hernia is completely closed according to any possible method, and then cover that you place behind the tip with a wool of equal quantity; and prepare an ointment of powdered myrrh and album of egg on the whole muscle, as it is rolled over, and place strength behind the tip with a bandage of decent stricture; and the cloth should be rolled over the ointment, and the hand of the patient should be attached to the neck of the patient, and let it be, and do not squeeze the hand of the patient for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And make sure that the patient's food is placed near them while they are resting, as it is more beneficial for their recovery.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And the food should be given closer to seven or eight in the evening and then some exercise should be done; if it is stopped and not softened, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	However, if the joint is dislocated due to prolonged exposure to moisture or other causes, then it should be treated with a pointed cautery three times, as described in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not fixed, and the bandage and splint are reduced over it for some time, and it is not fixed, catheterized, or able to lift that arm to the sides, then know that the nerves at the head of the muscle, which are at the top, have been cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in that place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	When the dislocation of that which is made in the chest and breast or parts behind it, reduction is done by pushing and extending with the hands, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another remedy should be given in that place, and cure it while it is being healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if severe swelling occurs in the limb and movement is delayed, then the patient should use warm compresses until that swelling is reduced and it returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and it returns with difficulty; and if it is dislocated in all parts, especially at the part that connects to the back part, and the dislocation of the shoulder is not hidden from you where it is found behind the armpit or behind the touch, according to whatever figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the shoulder dislocated, if it is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the other shoulder muscle, this is your clear indication.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And if you can, cover them and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible so that the abscess can come to them, for if you see the abscess, it is difficult to reduce it, and it is not always healed; and especially when it is in the parts behind, for it is more harmful than all the other species of dislocation, and causes greater pain, and more severe symptoms that can lead to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient should be extended to both sides, and the arm of the patient should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor should be on the back of the patient and below, and he should press the joint towards the palms of his hands, or at the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in the parts behind, then return to it as you bend your hand towards your palm, until you strike the back at the root of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And two assistants should extend the arm, and two assistants hold it in place to prevent movement during extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate the arm in all directions, as it is wrapped in a folded cloth or bandage on the patient's chest.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint with his hand, apply some oil to it so that those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint and facilitate its movement; and then gently push the joint back into place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then place the patient on a cushion that has sterility and excellence in its composition, and extend the arm downwards, and let it hang from the neck, and leave it like that for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then remove the bandage; and if the joint is formed in its place, then remove the bandage and leave it like that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strong enough, then repeat the application of the plaster and bandage, and leave it like that for several days before removing it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If an injury occurs near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then administer moisture in bath and gentle friction, and compress it until it is alleviated; or place a fat pad over the joint, and leave that on the bone and the night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then place that in the bath; and when it is soaked, then you friction the joint gently with cold friction, and repeat over the fat pad, which is a roller of motion, one, two, and three times.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	using a bathing instrument, until it is lukewarm.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place a wet and burned cowhide bandage on that; and do some of those turns, because that is moist and reduces it to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is at the joint that is between the arm and the shoulder.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Sometimes the shoulder is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is difficult, and the opposite is the other joints, but rather, the speed in reducing it at the time of dislocation is important because the joint may become abscessed or something happens to the abscess.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of this shoulder dislocation is that you place the patient's shoulder joint on a table and the assistant extends the other person's arm, and the doctor places his hand or palm on the edge of the joint, and pushes it back to its original position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it should be considered whether the palm is already attached to the chest of the person, then the patient places their back on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is in front of the arm, then the position of the arm should be naturally on the table, so that the doctor's hand can be on the edge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, good; and if not, then press that abscess and let go of the person; and do not do that, because otherwise, it will not heal or you cannot reduce the joint more than passing days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	When the joint is second in its twisting; and if the patient does not know any cause, but the muscle is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or torn, and it is not inserted into it but should be strengthened with a pointed cautery for the joint of it and strongly apply that to it as well.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, when the wound is returned, place a cushion over it which we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for several days; and then it should be removed and left alone, and the muscle of the patient should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However, if the movement of it is obstructed and occurs in it some gravity, then apply a wet cloth and some friction for several days until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the cure of the aforementioned dislocations.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes these dislocations occur at all times.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of these dislocations occurs at the back of the hand or on the belly of it, then tighten the tendon and push the dislocation of it towards the fingers, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the said patient, suspend the device to the dislocated part, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend that one and extend it until it is equal to its own day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is clean, apply the second method according to that description, and do not stop releasing it during the day and exercising the movement, and apply it at night; and do so for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the patient, and apply it to that part and do the first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do the same if it is dislocated in the other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When an accident occurs to some of the vertebrae of the back or neck with complete dislocation, and they remain without moving any more vertebrae from those places, then in that case there is no cure, because death approaches the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	When the patient cannot control their bowel movements and cannot hold it back, and their body is softened by heat or warm blankets or pillows under them or over them, or a sponge in that place, then heat is applied to four parts of the body.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	So it is now called a "gelatination" at those parts.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The cure for that is to consider whether the gelatination has occurred due to pregnancy, because in that case it is not a cure or a healing of all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In those cases where it occurs due to injury or percussion or something similar to those, as the ancients said about the methods of cure in that long sermon, which brings the most profit; but I have already opened and explained that from which few people are excused because of its proximity to understanding and its exposure, and I have exposed and formed it with various instruments of that kind, and shown it to you and spared you that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that in cases where the body parts are affected in the chest, there is no remedy or cure for that; and similarly in those that are made at two levels.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those that are not cured are only those that occur naturally, and for that I would recommend this remedy.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And the patient should be extended on his face over a flat surface as close to the wall as possible, and then extended behind it with a wet cloth to prevent the chest from being exposed.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then place a pillow under his head, and another pillow under his feet at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the nurse should hold the pillow, and not be placed in a ditch; and another nurse should hold the other one according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap a cloth around the patient's head and place the leon ferm titillator on it; extend the other end of the titillator to the pillow under his head, and fasten it there; and then strengthen the other bandage over his ankles and under his feet, and fasten it to his abdomen; and then adjust all the bandages and fasten them to the other pillow under his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the assistant extends the bandage to the part of the wound, and does not leave the two wounds and the bandages of his places in which they were placed, but rather does not stop there as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his hands on the patient's spine between his shoulder blades, or places them on a table, and adjusts his feet on the table until he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if he does not return by this method, then take a table whose length or width is about three brasses, and dig in the wall where we said that the patient should have a place between the edge of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And the assistant places his hand on the patient's spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and stretches him until the spine is straightened and he returns to his place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the other one which is turned around the other side; and it is that you should stay on the ground with the patient's head in the back of the two thighs, the length of which is about an arm, and the patient's head in the back of the other two thighs; and let the distance between each thigh be a palm, and it has been done in each thigh where the turn is made, and each one should be stopped on the ground so that it is not crooked.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be a thin rod in which the needle is placed, and it should be rotated between the two holes of the two rods.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it there is a hole in which the rod is formed, its length being one palm more than that which is rotated; and in the other two rods, it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the cords that you have tied in the chest of the patient in the hole which is to be used as the head of the rod, and the cords that you have tied in the cushions of the patient in the hole which is to be used for his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each rod should have a minister who twists the rod against his chest, and the doctor equalizes the sacrum as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the rod:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the sacrum is returned and the area is equalized, then cover with fresh clay from the riverbank, and stop; and place a board over the clay, the width of which should be three palms or about those, and the length of it should be the quantity that took up the area of the swelling, and on the part of the sacrum.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then tie the bandage that we have mentioned, and use the patient as nourishment until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any imminence in the place at the end of the healing, then have medicines that moilify and cleanse be administered through long-term administration, which we have recommended; and it is already being administered in that place a linen sheet.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some wounds occur in the lower back of the spine, and it is caused by that dislocation; and that bone which already threatens to cause death if not treated with this medicine, will surely kill you.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle only dislocate, and do not occur at those places where other joints are removed and concave.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, that it is dislocated at the front parts, or at the front parts, or at the back parts, or at the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is more commonly dislocated at the parts behind, and to the parts in front or to the parts behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And of the dislocation at the parts behind, when you adjust the bed of the healthy person to the sick one, it is longer and the pillow is less than that of the healthy one, and the sick one cannot bend their knee but must lean on it, and this is the place where the pustule often forms from an abscess, so that the head of the cushion has already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the opposite of that which happens in dislocation is at the front parts, because those accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And of the opposite of that which happens in dislocation at the front parts is to extend the bed on both sides, but not bend that one which has pain in the knee, and if it is perforated to go out and cannot be placed on those front parts; and the urine of it is retained and the swelling of it forms an abscess, and you must place the bed of it on the thigh.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And if the person on whom dislocation has occurred is unable to extend their arm, nor to bend the elbow that bends it, and the cushion under them is shorter than the other, and the elbow is softened, and the head of the cushion is placed at that spot.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of these species of this dislocation is that you consider, therefore, if the dislocation is ancient and old, that it has already been treated by others, then administer reduction to it according to its arrangement, but do not expect that in that cure there will be any complications.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	And in the case of that person whose dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should do this: turn the joint and extend it to the parts behind and in front, and to the right and left, because it will soon return and not require any other cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	And if it does not return in this way, then you should prepare strong men and extend the cushion of the part behind the arm, or hold their hands, or lay a bandage on the cloth that is laid over the forearm; and another minister should extend the hand of that person above the wrist so that it touches the fingers of the hand; and place a strong man at the end of the bandage, and another should clean the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if the extension is from the shoulder to the shoulder blade, or from the back to the side of the ribs.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if the extension is of all those in a row, when the patient is raised to his own side and keeps hanging down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is particularly common in all four cases.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it is good; and otherwise, it is necessary for each type of treatment that is appropriate for its own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own dislocation, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts below, place the patient on his own back; and then place your hand on the back of the cushion in that place where the head of the cushion and the place that is placed below meet; and then extend the cushion from the side to the other part of the shoulder blade.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another servant strongly grasps the arms of the patient, and presses the back of the patient's body and extends it to the parts below by strong extension, so that it returns to its own place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This speciality is the least curable disease among those that this member is reduced to, compared to other specialities.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	However, if it is excused from you and you do not obey the entrance of this healing speciality, then tie both feet of the patient together with a strong, light rope, above their toes and below their ankles.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each should be four times the quantity of that, and the patient's bed should be extended more than the other by twice the quantity.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And the patient should be suspended over the top of the bed, and in the highest position; and the length of it from the ground should be twice the quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong young man to raise the pillow under the patient's head, and another young man should suspend it from the patient, and the other young man should strengthen the pillow with force, so that the joint returns to its place at speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	However, in the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the front part of the body, command the patient to lie on their back according to what we have recommended in the position of the hamstring; and strengthen the rope over the patient's bed properly and over their chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then place two cushions under them, one at their feet and the other at their head; and adjust the cushion under their chest on top of which they will be wrapped in a warm blanket, so that the patient is not dampened by the cushion being between their thighs, so that the extension is not torn from the parts behind.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each assistant extends their part, and the doctor places their hand on the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if one obeys the reduction, it is generally good; and otherwise, place your hand on it diligently and do as we have said in the book for that purpose.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May it be that the patient turns over their legs quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation occurs at the parts behind, then it is necessary that the cushion be extended more widely, and according to this method narrated above on the back; and the doctor places the palm of their hand on the long bone of the patient, and the other hand covers that, and the covering hand pauses at the part behind the dislocation to the part of the elbow.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is at the back parts, then it is not recommended that the patient be extended at the back parts and lifted on the ground; they should have something soft to lie on, as we said about the position of the patient on two pillows; and they should be on their face and the limbs are extended, as we said, without pain.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And they should be given compression with an uncooked egg on the location where the joint is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then, when the reduction is completed as follows — and the assistant of the reduction of the patient is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend two pillows from the patient, and when you see those equal and the patient extends the other pillow and expands that side, then you know that the member according to what is said is returned — and then you adjust two things and press and extend the bend as if the limb is not injured in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then remove the bandage and apply it again, and place one cushion under one arm and another under the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see those joints in the correct position, then know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of softening, then return and apply that, and extend it according to its first structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then remove that, and apply it again every day until the patient is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of dislocation of the thumb.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The thumb is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated at the base, at the joint behind, and at the joint in front; and it is not dislocated at the tip.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to place his cushion on the side; then know that the thumb is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all the patient's limbs is done by making the patient lie down, unless they can already sit up; place your hand on their face, and hold their foot between your hands; and then make them hold your palms against their back, and bring those between their shoulders to strengthen, and another minister extend their leg inside so that the back returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And then the patient's bed should be made to adhere to the cushion that is not laborious.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then place that plaster on it and make the bed adhere to the cushion, and leave those in place for three or four days, and then remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's bed for walking until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of the patient to you is excused, then administer strong extension of the same limbs that were mentioned in the previous cure for the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle sometimes becomes swollen by slight removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the complement, and the dislocation of it is made at the joints or at the joints of the foot.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that sometimes the ankle becomes inflamed due to the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The cure of its removal is of great relief, and it is that it be extended with ease to the hands and return within a short time.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In its cure when it is dislocated according to the complement, let the patient lie down straight, and hold that one a strong and skilled person from the back of the other in the middle position of it.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you take your right hand directly on the top of the foot, and your left hand on the side of the foot behind it in the position of the hollow.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then approach the foot to your left hand, and approach the right hand for two reasons, and extend the right hand; and place the cushion of the foot against the right side of the bed.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Do those two things according to what you have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then place the cushion of the foot on the right side of the bed, and you are at the back.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So return in one or two ways with this method, and if you see the foot equal, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation on it, as it returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing it with that method, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a firm pillow under them, and put a cushion between their thighs, and you have already covered them with a cloth so that they do not get cold.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the assistant should hold their limbs, and another assistant extend the foot to their hands or to the cloth that lies on the back of the foot; and then each assistant should be extended against the extension of their own part, and the pillow should be extended between the thighs of the patient holding that, so that the body of the patient is not pulled away from its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor should approach the dislocation with his hands, and another servant should hold the clean cloth to the parts behind, as the dislocation returns to its place.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation has returned and it is declared that the reduction of it is healthy, then pause to apply a strong bandage around it, and tie the foot to the bed.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful not to tread on the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over that is not too tight and does not harm it.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it for two or three days; if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And remove it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient to walk for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to walk in that space, do not do so until the dislocation has dissolved and rotted, and avoid that which does not require healing.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if the abscess bursts, then be careful to administer in its cavity what we have mentioned earlier, in another place of healing and soothing, until it is recovered.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the cure of dislocations of the toes.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	That which is dislocated should be equal to a little extension of its tendons; and this is not difficult, in front it is easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in the joints of the back of the foot, then cover that you make the patient lie on their side with their foot at the same height as the ground or on a table, and be present there.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you will place your hand on their foot, and place the other on the joints, and press that against their foot to return it, and you will see that it is equal and does not appear in the prominent location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place the other on their belly under a table that holds all of their foot, and have two covers, and strengthen that against structure decent and firm for three days; and then remove it and let them rest from walking for several days, until it is restored and assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the types of dislocations that can be caused by pain or fracture or any other means.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occurs, and you pierce yourself in the treatment of that and in its restoration, various evils succeeding the death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that reason, one should not assume in the treatment of that and its restoration, but rather the one that is known in the art, of long use, merciful and compassionate, late, not burning or presumptuous; and that uses in the beginning of medicines that cedar tumors as much only, and leave the patient to divine judgment, but rather to that one to which you hope salvation from perdition, for relief from the malady, and in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then make an effort to restore it as soon as possible from the beginning of the cause, giving that it engenders tumor as much.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as you wish, then administer a regimen that cedes tumor as much and heals the pain with this one that is suitable for it from the decoctions of drying.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the bones that are separated, then you should pierce their skin, and do as we have said in the simple cases of that which precedes in those places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid the second of that instrument in the ways of fear according to what my preaching has preceded you; for that is better for you to leave to your Creator, and more enduring to your glory, and more salutary than those which you will see in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Here ends the words of Albucasis perfectly from which God be not blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
