Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	And now begins the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, students, I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, because of its completion and because of its explanations and because of its declarations, I believe that I have completed what I promised to you in this treatise, which is part of surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The operation of amputation has been completely absent from our region and from our time, until quite recently when the science of it was rediscovered, and its proof was established; and no one knew about it except a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which were mostly lost and led to those errors and uncertainties until the understanding of it was established and its length was extended and its art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I believe that I have lived up to the order of this treatise in the second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work, which is necessary for addition to the declaration, and for its preparation.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	If the reason why one is not a good artist in their own craft in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and that it requires one to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which was recently rediscovered by Galen who knew the important parts of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their hardness; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations of their emissions.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for that reason, called Hippocrates, who said that one name is not enough, but more so in the work itself, and especially in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	Moreover, we have already said about him in the introduction of this book; for those who do not know what we have said about anatomy, they will not avoid falling into error by which many men have died, as I have seen too many of them, because they are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	When I saw a doctor who was folly and had incurred an abscess called hydrocephalus in the head of a woman, and had incised some arteries of the head so that great pus flowed into it, causing the woman to die among her companions.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who almost choked on a stone from a man who had swallowed it in his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and tried to remove that stone with a thin tube, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I had already called for help to extract that one, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the position of the patient, it was known that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took a fee from a duke of our land for surgery, and went to a very skilled blacksmith who was needed for the fracture in his thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture, on the wound, with pliers and strong structures, and did not let the wound breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Approach the dressing according to his wishes, and approach the bandage, and approach the ointment for several days and give orders that it be removed; and during this time, the dressing and the foot will become infected, and reach a critical state.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you are called to him, and prepare to remove the bandage, and achieve calmness and ease of his pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But the decay was already confirmed in the member, so it could not be stopped and did not cease to spread the decay in the member until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And another doctor came who pierced an abscess with cancer, and it became ulcerated soon, until the fire magnified the evil of him and he died.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason is that the cranium is pure of melancholic humor, so it does not allow it to reach him with all iron, but rather the member that suffers from all should be held.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for that reason, children, it is necessary for you to operate in two different ways: one in the operation that is associated with health, and the other in the work that is performed in the major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already seen that in this book, wherever there is an operation involving error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against that and lay aside the other, so that the fools do not come to speak to you and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And then take your weapons with solicitude and protection from God, and your patients with patience and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best method by the grace of God for their salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay aside the terrible illnesses that cannot be cured, and keep your weapons from that which causes you to fear, so that your faith remains in you and does not abandon you: because more will remain to your glory, and more in the world and after to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	I have also discussed some of these things in other books:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat a bad patient, because evil doctors will not be remembered.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already dedicated this book to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begins the division of the book, and the first of the first section.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered within the book, in the forms of instruments and in the irons of cautery, and of what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second section.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and perforation, and on ventouses, and on plasters, and on the extraction of sage and similar things to those, all chapter and ordered from the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third section.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and on dislocation, and on the cure of twisting and similar things to those; chapter ordered within the book, and from the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of pointed cautery and sharp medicine and memory of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that begins the treatise of all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	That you know the quality of those points of that cautery and of its nozzles, and in what condition it is prohibited to use cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, the speech about the quality of the cauterizing needle and its handle is long and elaborate, and subtle for the knowledgeable, and secretly hidden; and from there they have spoken much about wisdoms, and they have been disagreed upon, and a little of their speeches remains with me, due to length.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore it is said that the cauterizing needle corresponds to the entire comprehensive material or its materials, except for two materials, which are tail materials.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the tail material, they disagree; for one said that the cauterizing needle is beneficial for it, and the others said the opposite of that, which is not convenient in illness because of its quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not convenient that illness be cured with that which is cauterized and dried.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And they said that one who said the opposite of that, which is beneficial for cauterizing in all illness tail material that exists in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man and its humidity to the comprehensive material of fire, the body of a man is pierced.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I heard from that person's mouth that he had experienced this some time ago.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But he may not know that this has been extracted and exercised in the capital of cautery by previous practice, and has recognized the diversity of the composition of men and the disposition of their diseases in their bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the time span of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other compositions, do not be afraid of you, and especially in wet diseases, since all doctors have been agreed on those, and they do not differ in the recommendation for cautery in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and its goodness, since it is used in medicine as a burning agent, is because the fire is simple, the action of which only reaches the member that is cauterized and not to the other member attached to it unless by a small harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of medicine as a burning agent does not reach to that in the members which are attached to it, and therefore it is difficult for the disease to come into the affected member and it is rarely used.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	May the fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, not do anything but superfluously; and we already know this through experience and the length of service in the study of the art over the truth of the causes; and for this reason he is excused from the length of the speech. If not for that, it would not have been read to you in this pause secretly by the fire, and the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels evils, the philosophical demonstrative sermon, which would be sharpened in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Know, children, that they should not be separated from the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and pause at the best time of primaveyra.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm caused by the time accident is submerged in the benefit of that which is thrown with the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pain or necessary pain, quickly and forcefully, the ones that do not suffer delay because they fear those that come from evil, which is greater than small harm entering through the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And do not catheters in your feet, or sons, that is only estimated by the general people and foolish doctors, because that disease which is cured by cauterization is not always necessary, and they pause that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not always there that they fear for that, because cauterization is only in a place of medicine which alters the appearance and dries out the moisture which are the cause of why the pain comes.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But however, cauterization is used excessively in medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his disease returns in some time of the day, according to the appearance of the patient and the location of his disease, and its virtue, and that which is prepared in his body from the accumulation of excess in him, and that which is obtained by him in his acquisition of foods and similar causes; but the disease in which cauterization is administered is a subtle disease in a member of few superfluities and moisture, such as cautery for tooth pain and similar to that, possible it does not return that pain, but that which is done in small.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And more commonly spoken language is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and rightly so, as they believe that there is no cure that can be achieved by means of medicine or any other cause that would require cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is in the opposite; and they understand that cautery is the last resort of medicine only when administering methods of treatment in some diseases, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause, they administer homeopathic cautery, and it works for that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here it is understood that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not as they believe the common people and too many doctors think.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that gold is better than iron for cautery, and they did not say so only because of the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place for cautery does not hurt, as it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen that there are those who say that it only works in some bodies and not in others, and gold cautery is good and better than iron cautery; but however when you do gold cautery with fire, it is not up to you, as it depends on the amount of gold that you want according to the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive the heat; and if you place it over the fire, the gold melts in the fire, and some pieces are created for the craftsman to use for that purpose.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for that purpose, we should use a pointed cautery made of iron, lighter and more conveniently placed at the right angle for the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter in the second chapter of the cautery, and have ordered those in the foot, so that when he asks for what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for pain in the head caused by cold and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery applies to the cold and moisture that cause this accidental condition, which is the cause of many traumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the arms and legs, and many sleep disturbances, and toothache and stomachache, and generally all illnesses that come from cold, such as paralysis, drowsiness, and apoplexy, and similar in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, commands the patient to take a laxative medicine to empty his head, for three or four nights, according to the patient's ability and age and custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command the one who shaves his own head to hold the mirror between your hands and place your hands on his chest, holding them there.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the razor blade of your palm against the nose between his nostrils.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, as soon as you feel the location of the wound, mark that spot and then ignite the olive oil cautery of which this is the shape:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that on the location well-aimed, so that it slowly descends, and you gradually tighten the bandage, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then slightly lift your hand and look at the location, and if you see any quantity of bone exposed, as much as the quantity of grain, then lift your hand, and if it does not return, place your hand on that iron, or another of those, if it is cooled, before it is seen from the bone what I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small pinch of salt and dissolve it on the location and leave that for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your hand on the flat side of the shovel and hold that over the entrance to prevent the embers from being destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the four-ingredient ointment into the wound to make it heal.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that as soon as the plague is opened, the arm becomes more painful and less useful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say that the armpit should be cauterized into the bone, and the cautery should be held there until some piece of the bone is attached.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove that which has been attached to the bone, and then heal it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cautery should reach the back, until it breaks through the bone strongly before the bone rots, and this is the way to make a small incision:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate that from that wound, the fumes of the head come out.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then healed before it becomes solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these two types of cautery used in all men, except in those who are second in line for fear; and let that one, I advise you, be better for their salvation when it is, because the head is developed by the solution of continuity of it with which we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is naturally free.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first type of cautery is more saving and better for me; and from that one, you should choose the other work for salvation.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the head cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the whole head there is chronic and long-lasting pain, and that is prolonged in the patient, and uses of garlics and of cochias and of capipurges and of emplaustres and of guatz and of cadels and of gualinas and of semblantz, and especially if it has already been cauterized by a cautery that they have and not appropriated to it any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and not free and atroba mot gran freg, then that cauterizer should use another cautery instead of that one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then apply the pointed cautery on the surface of the head, entering through where the bone is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the bone and discover the amount of the bone that we have found, and cauterize that with a pointed cautery in the part behind the head in the place where the sponge is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand away, and do not expose the bone, because the patient will suffer great pain different from all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will direct you to this location, because the pointed cautery that is used to cauterize the bones of the head and the occiput is more subtle than the one that is used to cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is the shape of it.
Capitol ters.	Third chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the ancient non-antique cauterization of the pineal gland.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain is felt in the part of the head, or pain spreads inside the skull, and other treatments have been administered and have not helped, then cauterization should be performed in two ways: either with a sharp cautery or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May a pointed cautery be used as a medical tool to remove a splinter from the hand, and then clean it with water and cover its extremities with ointment.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then incise the wound area on the temple with a blade that is entered into the place where it was made, until it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply strength to the stopped wound by pressing constantly, and leave it for three hours; and then remove the bandage and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then place a poultice on the side submerged in boiled water until the wound is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do so with some medical tools that I have written about in the other treatise on medical tools.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cauterization be done in this manner: light the cautery of which this is the shape:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a clawed cautery, because its head is shaped like a carnation in which there is some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small pinpoint.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And place your hand over the painful area, and rotate the small iron at high speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of tissue that is stuck by the stick's sharpness is too much, lift your hand to prevent the artery from being stuck, so that no blood flows out.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And apply a salted water bandage to that area, and leave it for three days; then apply a soft bandage, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cauterize the end of the knife with a pointed cautery, and be careful not to cut the artery in this way.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cauterization of an old wound.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an old wound with the previous cure and the cure mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and if the cure does not improve it, and sometimes due to the disease that does not allow you to use the first pointed cautery or the fire cauterizer, then wait until the cauterizer becomes hot, as it means to place it over the painful area along a long line of the same length, or another; then place your hand firmly and strongly on that area where you are about to incise the skin and penetrate into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is damaged by chewing, and that the jaw not be held tightly and the nerve that causes pain in that area, and that it does not become spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and care of blood flow from the artery that is abscessed, which is feared in its abscission, and more so for those who do not know what to do and are not skilled; and leave the operation in him at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And if you want to remember the regimen of blood flow from the artery after an accident, in its own place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this disease that does not allow this cautery and sees the patient's body tolerable, cauterize that in the middle of the head as we have reported, and cure the wound before it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter of stretching of the artery with a two-pronged cautery, and this is the best cauterization and more conformable.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cautery for treating gout pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the big toe occurs due to infiltration and is cured by laxatives and the other treatment mentioned in the previous section, but the pain persists, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one without punctures, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then bring the punctures close to the flame, and place them around the entire big toe as if it were a wheel, or in the circuit of each one if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along with the cautery, gently apply it to the tip of the big toe as needed without hurting the area.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of the points in the entire big toe is used, and it is found to be helpful, then cure the areas before they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cautery for treating torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture that is cured and cannot be treated by cauterization except for the specific ones that come from flexion, as we have mentioned in the sections on diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the specific area that causes dryness or spasms of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that area of torture with tinctures and capipurgi and guarguarismes, and do not compare your treatment, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first at the edge of the earlobe, the second a little below their temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your hand on the opposite side of the affected area, as softening only occurs on the healthy side.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that area with the cauteries at the edge of the earlobe, a little above the top of the cap, and in the temple another, the longest of which should be second to the length of the said point, and place your hand over the cauteries until the amount of the majority of the specific area of the code is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cauteries, and it is specific to the lancet, the shape of which is given in the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	May it still be less subtle than that one has with vessels; and cover that which is in the excess of grease with a cloth.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place where that process has taken place until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When ancient apoplexy is cured with that which we have said and does not conflict with your medicine and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize that place with four cauteries: over all of his head; and with a cauterizer and in the back of his head, as we have said; and with a cauterizer on his neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cauterizer is made according to what has been said.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and further back; and then cure that which has taken place.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of the cauterization of memory loss caused by a stroke.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	When the patient first begins to show signs of illness, give them large doses of medicine that will help them feel better.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the entire head of the patient and place a plaster made of the following description in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And place some of those, which are the handle of the cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Do that second, as you have already described.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if those remedies are effective; and if not, then make three points on the back part of their head, which should be placed in the most superficial part of the head towards the back, and the least deep part of the head towards the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place the largest part of the above between each point, and then cure the pointed cautery as you have already described.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you also feel it and the patient is able to bear it, then make the point in the middle location; and if you feel more pain, then apply the pointed cautery over the two toes.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Approach the wound that needs to be healed; and use the pointed cautery according to the shape given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cauterization of the perineum and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	You have already processed in the softening of the head and that which we have said; and approach the head of the patient, and then cauterize that pointed cautery at the middle part of the head, and cauterize over all the bones of the head, and cauterize over the back part of it, and three cauterizations over the spines of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the patient's softening of the body of three such and those who can tolerate them, and the illness is strong, then cauterize that pointed cautery over the spines of the back, and afterwards cauterize through where the codena mot of it is located, and raise the tieua ma.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And approach the wound that needs to be healed; and this pointed cautery should be used according to the shape given.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of the cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is caused by humor.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore you should modify his brain at the beginning of his illness with hot and cold remedies, which we have said in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer gargarisms and mustard plasters to the same person who modifies him, giving that for several days, good nutrition.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then remove the patient's hair, and then cauterize that with a cauterizer in the middle of his head according to the previous method, and with another cauterizer in the back of his head, and on each ear of his head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates, then cauterize that with cauterizers which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body over the spinous processes of the neck and the spinous processes of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use an olive-wood cautery as necessary.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then use a thin cautery gently like this.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted by humid and flatulent humors, then cauterize those parts that we have mentioned in the book.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and tends towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give them that which purifies their brain according to that which has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and make a circular incision in an appropriate place on their head, and place your hand in the middle of that location.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be lying down and held by all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then place a liniment; and it is more worthy of being used as an ancient remedy for sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that one over the fire, appropriately measured, which the suffering one says is enough when it is in them.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that one at the middle of their head, in a circle, and let it melt into them.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do that for the patient every week, following another regimen of food until they are healed; or if you want, make small points with the most appropriate cautery, but always have your hand on a cautery that is properly ordered: this is a special type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place that one on a soft cloth or in grayish wool.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of the application of cold water to the skin.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared to you that the beginning of cold water on the skin, as I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to the patient water that will make their head cool, and keep that one from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let that person bathe in warm water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then order that person to shave their head, and cauterize that pointed cautery at the middle of their head; and then cauterize that pointed cautery with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of a headache in two hairlines, or with one if it is the beginning of a headache in one hairline.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut all the veins and arteries that are left behind the neck; and place those cauteries in that long area near the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And watch out for blood flow when it is cauterized; and if you see blood flow from it, stop the pointed cautery with some medicine that is possible for you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And bring some remedy that is in the extraction of arteries and the opening of those and the prevention of blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some veins are cauterized in the neck behind two bones with two cauteries previously produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of ancient cautery of tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears from the joints are very old and flow through the veins and arteries that are manifest in the location of the forehead and it is verified that this is excessive and fluctuating, then cautery that we have mentioned at the beginning of the chapter about water cascading in the joints, and cautery in the middle of the head and two cauteries on the neck below two temples, and two cauteries on the neck below two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if it is necessary to add, then cautery that one in the entire length of the hair on the end of the forehead with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of ancient cautery of the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that one who we have mentioned in the division and have not yet healed, then you should prepare and give to the patient the snuff for three nights; and then remove the head of it, and cautery with the middle cautery or olive oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then, using that pointed cautery, carefully cauterize the two points on the two upper corners just below the hairline.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that one.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This is the shape of the pointed cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cautery for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this crescent-shaped cautery; and this is its shape:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you want to cauterize it above the two upper corners a little, and then lengthen them from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	The length of each cautery should be according to the height of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to the amount that the inner part of the eyelid is attached.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	When the pointed cautery is used on the eyelid when the eyelashes are converted to the parts inside and prick the eyelid.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the eyelashes are converted to the parts inside and prick the eyelid, the pointed cautery is used in two ways, either as a surgical instrument or as a medical tool that burns.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the pointed cautery is used as a fire, command the patient to close their eyes and turn their eyelashes inward with those that clean them, until they are prolonged and equal; and if pricking that causes harm to their eyesight, then hold the eyelids of the patient with one bandage so that it is not damaged until their eyelashes have grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When they have grown back and are equal, then place the head of the patient on their chest, and apply a bandage over the eyelid of the patient with a tent, which should be shaped like a mourning veil, and its beginning should be near the eyelashes.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And place a warm compress on the affected area, using alum or a poultice of poppy seeds.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And remove the heated cautery from this position.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And cauterize the shape that has been marked, little by little, in spiral motions, until the surface of the skin is burned, which should appear like a blister, entirely.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And to prevent the wound from becoming infected, it is necessary that the eyelid of the eye has already been lowered and the eyelashes of the eye have been raised from the point of the wound.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place a warm compress on the area until the wound is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that area until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the eyelashes return to their original position and the eyelid is softened, then do another point on that area as you did previously.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize them where they are raised to their natural place and equalized so that the hairs do not poke the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	If the cautery is made of medicinal combustion, command the patient to pull out the hairs where they are stretched and equalized, and then make a shape of paper or cloth like a fan of myrtle.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take some dry sawdust and fresh charcoal, and mix those with the ashes, and make that into a paste so that it is not scattered; and spread that paste on the paper that is made like a fan of myrtle, and place that over the wound; and place the other side of the wound in album of honey, and the head of the patient should be in the highest position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the other side of the medicine on the wound and press it slightly but not too much until the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, which is like a fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And therefore, when the persistent gnawing pain ceases, then remove the medicine and apply a new one; and afterwards consider whether the eyelid has been raised as it was when washed with warm water or with cold water, for that is good; and if not, return to the previous medicine and apply it to the place where the medicine has not been applied and does not disintegrate until your operation is complete and it is contrary to the wound.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand over the wound to prevent the pus from coming out until it is completely eradicated and heal it with the ointment of definition or another until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to keep a watchful eye on your operation that the medicine does not fall out of the wound, and if the eyelid becomes softened and some cause of the hairs in the wound, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid becomes softened, and usually do as you did at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the method of extracting bile.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the bellies of men are varied according to their size and condition, and therefore your contraction should be made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not cover the right way to that one who is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the belly.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula with that which we have said in the divisions of diseases, do not compare your cure, but rather cauterize it in this way: command the patient to place his head on your lap, and hold his head between your hands in such a way that it is not too loose or shaken.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a poultice of bread or mustard on the belly of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be rounded, like a cane or a pen of the vulva, at one end of which is made the cautery.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you see, it should penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to come out with a probe.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But the one that is concave is better for the work of the toe.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is opened, and drain the pus from it and dry it out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then open it and remove the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place your hand over the area where the heated cautery is, and hold the patient's hand or the doctor's hand on the part of the nose, so that your hand or the patient's hand does not move, and then place the cautery in the gray matter of the brain and corrupt that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of the toe, the cautery goes through to the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and let that be for three days, and then place your hand over that area and pour some drying agent into it until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it has passed several days and is not healed, then pause over the sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and then scrape it according to what is convenient in its own chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterizing the fistula that was previously said: enter the place of the fistula and make a small hole in that fissure, which is the shape of the lead; and put in it the amount of one ounce of lead founded; and with your hand am well retained, and do not let the patient suffer because the lead does not reach the bottom of that; and cover that you are on the edge of the fistula with oil or water, which lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and cure, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a draft of nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose as soon as it comes to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of the wound in the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Moths often occur as fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you cure those fissures with the remedy that we have mentioned in the divisions and do not apply your cure, then ignite the small cauterizing iron of this form:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And the cavity of it according to the thickness of the spoon.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that carefully in those fissures until the cauterizing iron reaches the edge of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with that wax until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth, an abscess occurs and swells up, and then it bursts, and then it becomes inflamed, and then it is filled with pus, and a fistula forms, and then you cure it without applying your cure, then you should ignite the cauterizing iron according to the amount that has been reabsorbed in the fistula, and then place that ignited iron in the mouth of the fistula, and then your hand enters until the hot iron reaches the edge of it, and then make a small incision or two; and then cure it with that remedy that we have mentioned for the cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the bone is broken and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and treat the rotten bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the extraction of teeth and the softening of jaws.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the jaws are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, treat those wounds with medicines and do not confuse them, place the patient's head in a high position, and then ignite the cautery in the shape that will come to you, without you placing the cup on the tooth and inserting it into that cautery burning fiercely, and then quickly remove it so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the level of the tooth when the wound is reached.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient closes their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and you can see that when the loose tooth is closed and the softened jaw is strengthened and the moisture corrupted is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	About the cauterization of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by cold, or there is frost or worms in it, and the treatment with medicine does not work, then cauterization can be done in two ways: with a cautery made of cow's horn, or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	With the cautery made of cow's horn, you take the horn and blow into it, then take a coat and wrap it around the end of the probe, and then quickly insert the burning cautery into the tooth that is causing pain until it is melted.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat this several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, soak some wool or cloth in the horn above, and place it on the painful tooth, and place the burning iron on top of that until the iron reaches the end of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cauterization with fire is that you wait for the whistle of wool or iron, and if there is some noise in it and the power of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then approach the cautery with the shape it will have, and place that on the tooth and your hand inside to ensure the cautery is not broken; and do this a few times so that the pain remains or on that day or on another day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And cover that the patient opens his own mouth with good border and holds it for an hour and then remove it; this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize whatever you think is best according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cauterization of extravasations.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extravasations are from injury and infiltration of humors and are not obedient to digestion by medicines and you want to make them more liquid, then approach the cautery with the shape it will have, having two ends prepared so that the smoke from the cautery can be expelled through the other end, and place that ignited on the abscess a few times, and if necessary for that, until it reaches the peak of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then pause the cauterization according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it for three days and place over it a poultice made from bread soaked in boiled water until it has been burned by the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that wound and apply bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the needle or cautery for such is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of the cauterization of a wound in the mouth and the binding of the jaw.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humors come over the throat of the lung, and especially when that is accompanied by fever, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that part of the throat in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to apply the cautery to the throat or burn the tongue of the patient, but a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that part with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the lower spine of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The pointed cautery should be held in the same way as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that part which was previously inserted until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of a patient's lung and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, and the patient does not have fever or tuberculosis, and it is an old disease, then cauterize that part with two cautery needles on the sternum in the areas where the ribs meet, and also with another cautery needle in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and hold the cautery needle as before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cauterization should be made with the pointed cautery needle, whose form is described in the previous section on joint pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let those points enter into those places; and then care for that part which was previously inserted until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cautery should have three points because cauterization is done in this way:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cauterization of the nipple, which is a helpful remedy.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the remedy is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not stop at its return time, it should be returned before it returns to that place, and with a small movement, it is displaced as needed, as we have testified, so first reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient over on their back or on their side; and then elevate the codeine which is in the part of the nipple to the parts above the left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the part of the nipple.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery which has two ends; and this is the shape of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the codeine until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will be as follows from four ends:
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and that which is subtle according to the amount of tension; and this is the shape of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some of these charms are adjusted according to this count and because they are the cautery of eight.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place your hand on the cauterized area with salt, and make the patient comfortable and not suffer for any time until they are comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and below, then make that, and cauterize on the muscle with a clavilh or pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of the cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is cold and moisture in the stomach that is not part of its composition and multiplies in it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment and do not confirm it, then it is likely that the patient will be over the supine position, and extend their hands and their things, and then cauterize that with three cautery: one cautery on the chest for the length of a pointed cautery, and two cautery on the back of the cautery, in the shape of a triangular cautery; and stretch between those that are not adjusted to make a perforation.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the thickness of the two layers of the patella's cartilage.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if the shape of the cautery is like this, then add it. And if you want to, use a large cautery on the middle part of the stomach in this form; and this is a cauteri in the form of a circle in this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach is to be cauterized at the point where this cautery frightens, then place your hand over the stomach according to how much you want to test, and then cauterize those points with this cautery; and then care for that which is preceded by the healing before it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cauterization of the foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the foot occurs due to cold or moisture or heavy air before its normal composition is disturbed by excessive exit, and the patient is cured with what we have said and does not compare, then place the patient on their back, and do not test three cauteries in this form and this quantity over the foot below the ribs, which is the position of a person.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery should be according to the width of the aforementioned one, and the cautery according to the length of the body straightened.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Do not touch the patient with the pointed cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of that which is applied to the quantity of the middle of the knee joint is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet, then extend his legs and raise his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to use this pointed cautery when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overdo the cauterization, and apply the substance of the whole knee joint so that it covers the entire body and reaches inside the intestines, as the knee is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of puncturing an abscess in the foot with a pointed cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an inflammation or abscess in the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its membrane, if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient feels increased weight and pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the membrane of the foot, the pain is very intense and often causes fatigue to doctors in treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should lie on their back; and then feel the location of the abscess and try to puncture it; and then use a cautery that looks like a needle, the shape of which has been described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize it with that and puncture until the entire cord is completely softened, until it reaches the bone, until it breaks through.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cauterization unless the one studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in which most patients have known bad outcomes; rather, this experiment has been attempted several times on this operation, but it is better to leave it to those who know better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cauterization of the soles.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauterizers of the soles of the feet, following this method, were said to be effective, and this is the one you should take from the long dry root that is found, and it is of the greatest importance.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge that in oil and put it on the fire, and then cauterize at that location where it is between the continuity of the scapula and the collar; and with two small cautery points, one declining a little to the part that was left by the beard, and two cautery points in that which is declining between the fifth rib and the costa, declining a little to the parts behind; and with another cauteri at the middle of the chest; and with three cautery points on the parts behind; and with another cauteri in that location where it is between the two shoulder blades, and with two cautery points on the sides of the chest, after the cauteri that is between the two shoulder blades.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not let your hand touch the cautery, but keep it in the open air of the workplace.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they also said that those who are accustomed to using a cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignite it, and then place it in the location between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess and is completely removed, as we have said in the abscess of the thigh.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this perforation, the cautery is not safe, because it has already happened in the location of the fistula that cannot be healed.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the mouth.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the patient's mouth with this method that we have said about healing in the division, do not compare your cure, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are correct, one of which is to make three cauterizations or four lines according to the length of the mouth according to the figure of the cauterizations of the thigh, the figure of which has been previously described.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And each cautery should have the largest part of a finger or slightly more, and the handle of the cautery should be the handle that we said in the cautery of the foot equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not place your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cautery is that you ignite the cautery having two tongs, which we have said in the capital of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the string that is at the end of the melon, which pierces the left side of the patient.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be the one that lifts the string according to the length of the body, so that cautery is made according to the latitude of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two tongs, ignite one, in that moment when those penetrate the string of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and so four cautery is made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cautery is made with a cautery having three tongs.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you should cure the pointed cautery so that it does not remain for too many days, as it is more harmful than the other previous causes in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cauterization of hydrocele.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Do not use a pointed cautery in hydrocele but rather in the proper place.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure the hydrocele, use the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment, then make sure that those cauterizations are made with four cauteries around the navel and one cauterization on the stomach, and another cauterization on the chest, and another cauterization on the back, and two cauterizations between the spine of the back, and one cauterization in the right side of the abdomen, and another cauterization on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be appropriate to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And make sure that the cauterization is done so that it does not cause pain for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not cure the patient by approaching the pointed cautery to them, as this would cause their wounds to become infected, and they would be faster healed with other treatments.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the pointed cautery used to cauterize the abdomen is similar to the one above, and the one used to cauterize the buttocks is according to its own form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are infected with hydrops and filled with water sitrina, cautery the feet over the back of the foot, avoiding that area between the ear and the ring, and raise your hand above the cautery and do not twist it; then raise your hand, and do not return to that position, as the water sitrina evaporates.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be shaped like this: And make two cauteries on each thigh, and in each thigh, make the cautery at the end of the cautery blade.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be as long as the cushion: and place it underneath and the other at the bottom of the cushion; and over each cushion, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time to prevent any water from accumulating in it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then care for those causes that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of the cautery of wounds in the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When wounds in the abdomen are caused by cold and humidity entering the body, which is the digestive and retentive virtue, such as in the stomach and intestines, and is cured with the methods of treatment and not with cauterization, and sometimes the patient suffers from a strong cauterization, then apply a large cauterization on their stomach according to what was previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, and the cauterization of the circle and four cauterizations around the delicate belly, and the clavilh cauterization; and the cauterization on the alcatin over the large bones, or two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you see the abundant humidity and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that above the stomach and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cautery devices near the stomach and below the groin, which greatly helps to relieve the condition.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter thirty-four.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	About the ancient cauterization of varicose veins.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are varicose veins in nature or due to thick humors that have infiltrated or corrupted by moisture, and they are cured by the method we have mentioned in the division, and do not compare it with other treatments, then cauterize with three cautery devices on the back of the small of the back, and with two cautery devices above the belly.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it is found that the stomach of the patient is infected and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is pale, then cauterize that above the stomach with a large cautery device as mentioned earlier; and with one cautery device on the chest, and with another cautery device on the soft part of the stomach, and with a hammer, and leave the cautery for some time, and then cure the patient before they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of the urethra near the opening of their abscess.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the urethra, then ignite the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that ignited cautery into the removed urethra, and finally introduce it through the opening until it reaches the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make that incision or two, if they are too large, then cauterize each one after we have regained them, and then cure those who receive this from the mouth until it is healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is better to do so gently.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed naturally in the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, then heal with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When an individual has a natural fistula in the back, and it is old, remove the rotten sane and humidity from it, and then apply a subtle probe to it, and know the quantity of its depth with the front-mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then apply a cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that lit cautery into this fistula, according to the quantity in which the probe enters it.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat the process with the cautery entering it until those corrupted parts are burned away, one by one or two or three, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the core of the bladder or the core of the intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not do that unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place where it was cured.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the wound is sealed, and the matter has been removed from it, and it has remained like this for a long time, then you will know that it has been completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the matter is not removed from it and remains there for a long time, then you will know that it has penetrated into the bone or corroded it, or that this is one of those causes from which it will return to its former state.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cautery of the eyes.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there is pain in the eyes due to a cold or thick wind, and the patient's eyelids are closed, then you should cauterize that above the eyes with a pointed cautery on each eye with a clavilh of which you should take the remembrance.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And if you cauterize too strongly, then after a short time, three lines of cauterization will appear, and they will be more noticeable than before.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of the cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes weakened and softened due to friction and moisture, such that the patient cannot hold their urine, then cauterize that part of the bladder closest to the urethra, where the penis begins, and cauterize with a pointed cautery in the middle part, and with another in the opposite side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the thickness of the skin; and cauterize with that cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cautery if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery should be a needle-like shape.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cauterization of the mouth.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When friction and moisture occur in the mouth, and it is prohibited to use pressure, and the teeth are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs from their decay, then cautiously cauterize that part with three cautery around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a pointed cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cautery, and the cautery should be needle-like.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cautery for the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist mucus is infiltrated into the part of the ankle, and its cause is the inflammation of its location, and when it is compared to the other, the cushion is extended over it.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is abnormal in the part where it is swollen.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then, you should cauterize the patient on the part of the ankle with a similar pointed cautery, so that you can properly apply it around the circumference of the part as it is rotated, and so that the part falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery that precedes this form is in the cautery of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not present to you, then use three pointed cauteries with large olive oil.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the cautery should be made according to the amount of the swelling of the entire sinew; and care should be taken that it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the buttocks and its cause is coldness and moisture, the patient is cured by the method we have mentioned, and this method is ancient. Therefore, you should draw out the patient's heavy humors with fetid or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of cauterization in this case has two ways: either with a cautery made of burning herbs, or with a cautery made of fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The second method has two ways, of which one is to cauterize that over the buttock of the patient with three triangular cautery according to this form; and make them deep enough.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be as much as the thickness of the patient's skin and if the cautery is olive oil or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Let some time pass before applying the cautery on the patient's head above the buttock so that there are four cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize the circle that precedes the form in the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which should contain and burn the entire sinew.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterization in the shoulder when pain adheres to the shoulder and does not extend into the space.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it extends into the space, then cauterize that one with two cauteries on the shoulder over the area where you wrap the patient who is suffering from pain; and with one cauteri on the back for a few minutes on the left side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cauteri cuts, and the depth of the cauteri according to the quantity of the sinew of the shoulder.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient wraps that place where the pain extends into the area mentioned above the feet, then cauterize that one here with a pointed cautery for three or four or more points as needed from that one.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient wraps pain to be left behind the shoulder in the space, then cauterize that one here with a cutting cauteri.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful during the cauterization process that you do not leave the cauterizing instrument in place for too long as to burn the nerves or cause great damage, and that by doing so it may harm the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen another case where they cauterized the scalp and left the cauterizing instrument in place during the procedure, and the bed on fire inflamed before the tumor was achieved, and fire pierced and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then the patient died.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two parts simultaneously, then cauterize each one in this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise men in the cauterization of any cauterizing instrument of which this is the manner: make it similar to a circle of iron of which the circumference is the length of one palm; and its opening should be according to the thickness of a date pit or a small amount.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let that circle be another third; and its space should be the thickness of a thumb; and those circles should be placed in two parts; and the length of those chains should be one or two fingers, and make them in those iron edges well dressed in the circles; and this is the shape of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Approach the fire until it becomes warm and produces sparks, and then place it on the patient's back, the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that area with three pointed instruments in a row.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it like that for three days; apply ointment to that area and leave the wound open for several days; and then care for that area until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Dear sons, we have not used this type of cauterization for this kind of wound because of the fear of its side effects, and because we have found some that cause harm to it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	However, those who suffer from this kind of wound often find relief in the area where it is located.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	However, those who suffer from this kind of wound often find relief in the area where it is located. They do this by making two circles with a hollow needle that has a pointed tip, and then they insert the needle into the wound and move it back and forth, like a door hinge; the length of the needle should be equal to the width of their fingers.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	If the space between the patient's thighs is too wide, then it should be filled from below and above, and they should be positioned so that their second forms are like this:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand on the part of the body where the patient is lying, and cover it with your hand; and take water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that water should be hot little by little, and let it stand for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the bite and the adhesion of it — because that bite has the quality of fire — until the bite stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe off all the hot water with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave it for three days and place your hand on that border until the blackness of the adhesion remains, and leave it for more days, and pour water over it; this is a remedy.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it with ointment until it is cured.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the cushion or the bed, place it in the state where it contains water, as it is made in the bath equally.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of the water cure, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkalis and unextinguished fire from a single part, and draw the pieces in a new wave of which the broken part is previously perforated by a small tube, according to the amount that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the other piece of the wave in another boiling water, and pour over it that alkalis and live fire of two waters which those take by a certain amount, and as soon as you understand those at the tieua main for good compression, and leave the wave that remains after the sharp water in the boiling water.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And adjust all that water, and pour it over another live fire and other renewed alkalis, as that is of a very strong heat, which is administered in certain medical operations and in cauterization of the other members, as that operation is of fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines are boiled in them, such as thyme and honey, which causes a sweet smell that is not known to be mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Guillia heard from an ancient man about the operation and cure that was done for the pain of gout and sciatica, and praised it as being very good, and said that there was no need for another cure, and that it was healed with a remedy such as this, which is to bathe in hot water.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be of certain fresh herbs, and if not fresh, then dried; and it should be crushed with a few grains of salt and placed on the water in which the pain is, or on the cushion, or on the chest, and left.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for as long as the patient can bear the heat.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put that in the bath and when the body of the patient is wrinkled, take that out and put it on the ground, for the pain stops and is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that no one should use this cautery for these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	According to Escorides, when there is a goat's wound and the vein is stretched, it should be cauterized with this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the patient's foot and the wound.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat's wound and apply it to the area that has been cauterized with charcoal; and place it on the wool and leave it until it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat that, and do not stop doing it until the sensation of pain reaches the whole body and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cauterization is called the cautery of goats.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the cauterization of pain in two places.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain occurs in the two places due to various causes, such as by impact or by excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, by the infusion of moist and ground material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And the cautery does not cut but only in this specific area that is made for the effusion of matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, after the evacuation of the patient, give them foul-smelling and similar pills, which are made on both sides in the area where the pain is three lines wide, more than you would try in each line with a cautery or more, according to the patience of the patient and the effectiveness of the pills.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And make the cauterization with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three or four cautery points in the form of a cross.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of cauterization at the beginning of gout.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	These afflictions often occur in children; and similarly, at the beginning of gout in children, it is customary for them to occur on their structure in the joints, especially in the evenings, elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And often in the lower spine of the back and at the feet, where it begins to overshadow the other sponds.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you see that and want to prevent it, then use the pointed cautery that is circular according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	which grips the cautery over all part of the sacrum equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, use the pointed cautery in a circle around the sacrum with two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And place the points between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then care for the area where it was healed with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that the cautery is not applied in a state of shock that is caused by spasm of the nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And so when gout is cured by the method of treatment and the pain does not return, then apply the cautery again.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you should cauterize that nearby area in the circle of the foot joint with a pointed cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the shape of this cautery is like this:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain extends to the ankles or other joints, and that area becomes swollen, then cauterize each ankle with three or four pointed cautery needles from each side with this pointed cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need more cautery needles than these, then cauterize that and do not put your hand too close to the cauterizing tool before it is completely cooled.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain extends to both ankles, then administer the cautery that we mentioned in its previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the feet and it is called gout, then prick in the circle of the joints as they revolve, prick in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If the pain persists in the aforementioned areas, then prick each knuckle and the palm of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If the pain approaches the joints or muscles, then cauterize the affected areas of all parts of the body.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not expel the patient from good care and reception of medicines, for if proper care is given and flatulence is expelled, this cautery method will heal, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of the cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the fracture is in the ankles and the intestines are pushed against the abdomen, and if it is approached, then order the patient to fast on that day and use mild cathartics so that the opening from their belly does not occur.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then place the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to hold their breath until the fracture is set or the intestines appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that one to the position of the patient's thighs, and try to mend the rupture on the bone of the pentenilh, and hold the end of it similar to the shape of a circle, and raise the parts of the body that are below.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then remove the cautery of which this is the form of:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	so that it does not move and get cotton.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery over that one held by your hand and the cauterizer, and enter that one when you have obtained the bone of the pentenilh in the middle of the deltoid; and repeat that other action if you have not succeeded in the first action in obtaining the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe the position of the intestine during your cauterization, so as not to burn the patient because if it comes out under the patient, great harm may occur.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you use the cautery, do not hold the bone, do not perform your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And be aware that the cautery for children should be thin according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And take care of the location of the cautery for three days until the wound from the fire is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of those other wounds until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should remain on their back for ten days until the wound is closed and the pus is drained.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And be aware that the patient's food should be given according to the length of time for their treatment, which is appropriate for their belly, and that the intestine should not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to remove it after ten days, then administer soft food, and keep that for another ten days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And if they are tired from labor and food intake and drinking, and from violent vomiting, then this entire regimen of healing will cure them.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And if you want to cure the ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, and so that they do not regurgitate, then cauterize the rupture with a red-hot iron according to the size of it, and this should be done with a clean part of it; and then care for that burn, and it should not be adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And they have already said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular iron according to this form, rather than with a tent.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is placed that is the most suitable for the width at the side of the rupture, and another line above; and your hand is placed with a scalpel, but the first cauterizer is more slender and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cauterization of tortion.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When the limbs are affected by paralysis or by persistent pain after an injury that does not respond to medical treatment for a long time, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery for each member should be according to its size, strength, and development, as well as its location and the type of pain it causes.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If he is healed by the first cautery, then good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on that member; for it is customary for those pains to be points of pain in that member that approaches the one, in order to achieve those cauteries within that patient before he is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47
De cauterizacio de lepra.	About the cautery for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leprous people are sometimes treated with cautery for a great benefit, and if the type of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, when you want to cauterize that person, consider whether the leprosy is common and as that which we have said in the division and not this, and fear that the corruption comprehends all of his body and his entire appearance, then cauterize that person on the head: with one on the back of the head, and with the second one behind it, pointing the forehead towards the ends of the hair; and with others on two ears; and with another behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, your hand with the pointed cautery enters a little into the bone, making a small incision, and then displace the sinews, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from there; and cauterize over the meat according to what is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and is manifestly apparent, then cover that part with the cauteries we have mentioned in the book; and cauterize over the end of the nose, and two cauteries on both sides of the chest, and two cauteries on two spines of the neck, and two cauteries on the spines of the back, and one large cauterization near the collarbone, and one on the shoulder, and two on each elbow, and one on each hand, and two on the wrists, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the patient's hands. And cauterize all those joints of the mentioned arms and feet, and over each toe of his feet, and on the shins of his legs.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that are on top of the ankle, do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some wounds are cauterized with a cautery on the bones of the jaw and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the tongue.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you should know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and more effective it is; and you should know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, just like they do with other treatments, so that their body is not shocked.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And you should know that the cautery sizes should be large or small according to the members and joints, as prescribed by the specifications of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the cautery with flour mixed with honey and another remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cautery for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, poultices, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb member with a cautery according to the size of the member or its part.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And insert a pointed cautery through the opening of the ear a little bit.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that area where it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes the veins are cauterized in some areas that cause pain in the hands and feet, and in the spine of the back and the eyesight of the nerves that move that member, and the wound is reopened.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume about that, but rather know what is written in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves moving the entire body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the cauterization of warts that are malignant.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When warts are ancient and do not compare to any of the medicines, then cauterize over that area with a pointed cautery in a little bit according to the quantity of the species of the ear opening until it is reopened and its color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that area with a poultice of errors and of lentils with roasted oil and of walnut leaves, and of cobweb or of ironwort, each one being a separate part and all mixed together, and then apply a cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the cautery of the neck.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When tumors begin and you want to remove them, then cautery that circle with the pointed cautery along its circumference as it is turned.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cautery with the back pointed cautery in the middle place; but I have not seen that, because I fear that it will become an ulcer, and I have already seen that in some cases.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cautery along its circumference with the pointed cautery as we have said, or with a pointed instrument.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 10.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cautery of the abdomen.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some abdominal swellings are delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess or because of the patient's old age, weakness, or time, and you want to hasten their maturation; then cautery along its circumference with a small pointed instrument; and apply leeches there to hasten their maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to make a perforation with this pointed cautery, then place it in the following form: and pause it at the middle point where it enters the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is placed too far, to prevent the body from being injured; and then care must be taken to ensure it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the cauterization of corroding.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corroding is a corrupting substance that moves within the body, which corrodes whatever it touches as if with fire, consuming dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see that corroding is in the location where cauterization with fire has been applied, then place small and large nails as appropriate in that location where corroding is present.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize it from all parts until you have completely removed the corrosion and there remains no cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then leave it for three days, and place olive oil mixed with salt on the cauterized locations until all the scabs have been completely removed and all the corruption has been eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then carefully remove those abscesses that are generating flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If after three days the flesh grows healthy in the place where there is no corruption, then it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that which remains in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And some acute medical remedies are applied to the wounds, which is in place of the cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, a pointed cautery with fire is not suitable for removing pus.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already told you the treatment with acute medical remedies in the division, and therefore take that which will be needed from it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 43
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cautery of clubs and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	The warts that grow on the parts of the foot behind the patient, which is called club, and is a great cause, which lies on the foot; and cautery is done in those two ways, either by fire or by the pointed cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	May the cautery be heated with fire similar to a poker, which should be made of iron according to the amount that contains the handle of all parts, and also of thin margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that heated iron on the handle, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the handle until the cautery reaches the depth of the handle.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it remain for three days until it begins to tremble.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply that with wild marjoram crushed with salt, and let it remain on that for a night, until that is eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with natural meat juice until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and there are wounds on the surface of the body, especially in the thighs and feet, then you should administer in those cautery with water, and take a syringe of iron or of a poker or of a poker, and place that over the handle; and then pour a little water into the syringe, and place your hand, and rotate that with the compression of your hand from all sides, and press the margin of the syringe on the root of the handle, and find the water cauda through the opening of the handle root; and wait for the patient an hour for the bite of the water cauda, and then remove that, because the handle roots are eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And then do those things to them until they come over all of which are in their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then cure those who have the spots of the clap by applying this to their mouths, which the flesh has been infected with.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cauterization for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When a person has trembling due to infection of the nerves or fever caused by it, or by another similar cause, then apply four cautery irons or one very hot one on the spines of the back, between each spine put a cauterizing iron; and place a cauterizing iron on their chest, and on their stomach, an olive oil cauterizing iron.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of the person is relieved and the healing of the sick person is accelerated.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cauterization for injuries to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are sharp injuries in the body, and open wounds that have been made from thick, corrupt matter, then at the beginning with a remedy, that it be cauterized over all of the wound with a thin, fine cautery iron, the end of which is extended to the fire; or with a long, sharp cauterizing instrument; or with a blunt cauterizing iron.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes, the pointed cautery is applied at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and it is not believed by some, and those who do so disrupt the excess and heal from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it should be done before evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 66
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of fluxes of pus from wounds by incision of the archery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Too many troops have flux from archery that is incised due to the wound, which causes deficiency, or it is incised due to abscesses or cauterization of the member, and similarly, and it is difficult to remain that one.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, if something happens to anyone, then place your hand on the orifice of the archery, and press over that one which you say is most affected by those troops before it stops the flux of the pus from leaving the one you said, and that it does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place in the fire the cauteries of olives, several and many, by the number of words, and blow over those before they are much ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take a small or large second instrument and place it on the spot where the artery is broken, over that vein hurriedly, so that it has not yet bleed, and insert the cautery into it and restrict that wound.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the wound is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove the instrument and extend the cautery, then take another cautery constantly from the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and do not stop doing that until the wound is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And beware that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it does not come over the patient or cause him more harm.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the wound in those places, and especially when the artery is large, then one of four ways: either with a cauterizing instrument where it has been inserted, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when its extremities are burned and the wound is restricted, or it is tied with a strong bandage or a piece of cloth for firm structure, or they are placed on medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the wound; and they are strengthened by a pillow or a compress at the construction of the wound.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May the one who administers a reasonable restriction of the patient's body and the patient's stricture with cloths or by positioning due to causes similar to those, not compare but rather console.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If that happens to anyone and it is not the doctor present or the medicine, then begin by placing a pad on the opening of the mentioned vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of the patient until the sinew is not separated from the main part of the plague, and above the arcery the said does not remain; and above the arcery sprinkle it with cold water frequently until the sinew is contracted and swollen; and cover in what way there is a need for cauterization or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incisions and perforations and bleedings and of phlebotomy and of plagues and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that cauterization with fire and medicine is suitable for all diseases, and their causes and occasions, and the instruments necessary in those cases, and we have ordered the chapters of the subiarnent of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so that the one who wants to know about it can be helped, regarding what he has asked about.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And I will begin by saying that you should know that in this chapter, son, I will tell you what is in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for that reason, son, I will tell you that in the operation which is in this chapter, there are many ways to evacuate the pus, which is very important for life, such as aspiration of the abscess or incision of the exit or purification of the plague or extraction of the stone or incision of the bone and similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the worst of them, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I will warn you that you should not do those things in which there is doubt, because some ways are due to the hands of men who have doubts about diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And from them there are some that you will go to your disease and it will be due to death, and you will suffer from the severity of your disease, and from the length of your disease, and because of the fear of the disease which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And from those who give you their names and details, you hope for their recovery, and their illness is dangerous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not consent to any one who comes to you with this method; and your caution should be greater than necessary, and your curiosity; and do not assume any cause of it unless you have certain knowledge that causes it to you, and to which successful succession brings praise.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your diseases prediction and indication of which is converted to health, because in that one is with you help over acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O children, God breathes His understanding into you and does not lead you astray or protect you, because that is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters following the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head between the feet, so that it is joyful to you what you ask about it and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of gout that is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You should know that this disease affects children during infancy and when the newborn's head is soft.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some are caused by an unknown cause.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have never seen this disease except in children; and to all those that I have seen it was accompanied by death, and for this reason it is believed to be caused by something hidden.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	I have also seen that a child's head whose skull was full of water, and the skull of which was always inflated until it could not be inserted into its greatness, and more that the humidity increased until death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is added between the spine and the bone, or is added behind the bone on the skin.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation in that case where the humidity is between the spine and the bone and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head at a certain latitude, and the length of the incision should be two fingers wide until the humidity flows out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the humidity is increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two incisions of this kind:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is below the bone, then you should open the commissures of the skull from all parts and pour water into it when you understand that your hand is in the middle and not on the parts inside and outside.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	So that you cut in the middle of the skull with three incisions of this kind:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And remove all the humidity from the incision; and strengthen the incisions with cloth and feathers; and apply that which is above on the fifth day, and remove the scab and cure the wound with ointments and balms, and strengthen the skull to its equality; and feed the patient with dry food after the member is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another way of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of water, that sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or in the part above, or on the right, or on the left; and then pay attention to the incision where the abscess and the collection of water appear, and do that which is most possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not sever the artery and engage in bloodletting, as this may cause death for the patient due to excessive loss of fluid.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Regarding the incision of the arteries that are located near the ears, which are called temporal arteries.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When a patient has cataracts or bruises on their thighs or chest, and this condition is recognized, and no healing is found in that, then the cure in this incision of those two arteries should be tried.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore cover when you want to incise those that the patient has on their head, and wipe the area with a rough cloth so that the vessels appear, and strengthen the collar of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein is placed; and the locations of each over the locations that are near the ears, and they are hidden in only a few people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then press on the vessel and try to incise each one at the tip of each part until it reaches the bone, and that is for the length of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you wish, insert the spatula behind the artery and cut through that area to expose the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if the length of the incision is too short, then when a vein is cut, the blood will flow out, which should be stopped frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the bowel does not appear at the incision, then measure the amount of space between three fingers and gently insert the spatula into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that amount of blood that flows out is usually one unit, and if it does not flow out more or less, then that is the amount that appears from the patient's virtue and the replacement of the bowel.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the cause of the swelling, and if there is some reason for abscess formation, then cut through that area to prevent it from becoming a pus-filled abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply poultices and lint made of cloth to that area, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of extracting the spleen which is located in the belly.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there are old, sharp stones or sharp objects in the abdomen, and pain is felt in the sides of the belly, and the pain is severe and similar to those, and it is not relieved by medical treatment, then we have found in these illnesses extraction of the spleen from the belly, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient lies on their back; and understands the spleen which is in the belly, and sees it through its own pores, and it is hidden only in a few people due to its strong attachment.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then the belly of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and then the area should be scratched with a sharp knife or evaporated with hot water until the spleen appears clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And at this time, you take the spatula of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you scrape the cornea with the sharp end until you reach the sclera; and then get in the eye and extract those from the superior parts until you extract the one from the cornea and discover that of the tunics which is left there, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with a piece of gauze at the end of the needle, and then incise one part according to the quantity by which its ends were stretched and contracted, and not too much, because if they are not incised, the blood will not flow out.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate the blood in drops until three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the sclera is large, then cover it with two pieces of gauze or with cotton strings long enough to prevent putrefaction during the healing of the wound and allow blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the excess that is between two limbs; and do so at that hour or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish, use the pointed cautery to make points into the bone of the cautery, where the extramittents are inserted, and it will be in the place of that metessa work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better to use the pointed cautery if the patient has fever or a scalded complexion; because the cautery is one of those causes that help to finish humidity, and therefore it is better in emergencies.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover the extraction of the archers that hump the place of the ancient cottage, and place them on clean linen, and then use dry medicines to heal the flesh and wet bandages until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And while you are doing another procedure to stop the flow of pus from the archer's wound, then you should tighten that pus, or the cautery, or what fills the place of the cottage, and press your hand inside until the pus is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes is present, then place your hand over the location where the pus is congealed, and cover the location with very cold water until the heat subsides, and then tighten it according to what is appropriate.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And it is said that the most effective method for extracting bones from a carcass is to cauterize the vein with this cauterizer, which has two points, so that you can accurately feel the two places when they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that what is between the extremities of it is not consolidated by this cauterizer.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cauterizer:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two points is as follows.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the sharpness of two points is not enough, it is better to use two points that are as sharp as two needles approaching each other, and do not dissect the flesh at speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, if there is any toughness in those places, the heat of the fire should be applied to them and the flesh should be cut away more easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and more useful.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two points is equal to the thickness of the toughness of the said flesh.
Capitol quart.	Chapter fourth.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of bodies affected by sharp and acidic humors from the joints.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acidic humors are in the body, and they affect the joints that are above the crown of the head, and there is no cause for healing in medicine, and the face of the patient becomes wrinkled and feels pain in their forehead as if they were walking with ants, and the joints of those are exhausted, humid and insensitive as if their flesh were known, and the scabs on them are scratched by the acidity of the tears, the ancient methods of treatment in the cure of these operations, and they name that cure "spread".
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then incise three grooves equally spaced along the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of the groove is less than two fingers: the first groove should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second along the length of a small movement of the eyelashes that are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful of the edges of the jaws, which are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of the gums to the lower jaw.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each joint is three fingers wide, adjust it accordingly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge or dry cloth, moisten it with the humor that dries the joint.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then place the spatula of two sharp ends, of which this is the shape of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the top of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Scrape off all the tissue that is between two incisions on the periosteum, which is above the bone, and then do that from the incision further to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then place the spatula and enter the first incision another time with another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place your hand on the sharp side of the flesh attached to the tissue, and on the other side of the bone, and push it until it reaches the second incision, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	While continuing the incision at this point of the codex, and then do that in the middle groove between the other grooves.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the amount of blood is equal, express the places of the patient's feet with a syringe.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place your hand on each groove of the old man's foot, and place your hand on those powders that are in vinegar and oil and vinegar, and see that it does not become an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and then care for that with an ointment made of basil icon and rose oil and other things until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	About the treatment of gallstones and the downward flow of the parts descending from the chapter.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When any vein is calcified and continuing, and sometimes the parts of the patient's eyes are weakened, and their eyelids are ulcerated and their eyelashes fall out, and in the front of the chapter there is sharp pain and consequent exhaustion, then you know that these materials and stones do not come from any other veins but those descending from the parts described.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is to order the patient to look at their own nose, and then insert a small blade into the middle of the forehead, near the temple (starting from the left temple and going towards the right temple; and the incision should go through the bone; and then stretch your hand over the temples which are swollen due to the mastigation), until it is through the bone.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry out all the pus with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill it between the two lips of the wound at the old wound or with dry cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply a clean cloth above the swollen area to prevent it from becoming an abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the abscess has decreased, then insert a small blade into the area where it begins at the bone, and then apply the drying regimen which is made of flour and collyrium (four parts of each), and make an ointment from it and apply it to these wounds on the skin.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment of that which catches in the fingers.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The entire cause that catches in the fingers is one of four species: either it is a mineral stone or a similar cause to a stone, such as iron and glass, or it is a plant cause such as hazelnut or bean, or it is a fluid cause such as water and vinegar and its similar substances, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when a stone catches in the finger or another similar cause to those causes that do not adjust or believe in the finger, and if the finger is exposed to the sunlight, and if you see the stone, then distill some oil of violent or sage onto it, and administer the extraction of it, and make the person sneeze in order to prevent the onset of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the finger, and extend the finger to the parts above, because these are the parts that are often forgotten in these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not already done, then administer extraction of the stone using the instrument called the epicicloidal epithelial probe with this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If the stone is already extracted with the instrument, it is good; otherwise, then administer extraction of the stone using the thin needle of double puncture.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And then if it is not extracted by that, make a needle of aram and insert the end of the needle into the auditory canal and close around the needle with wax and softened oil so that it is not pushed out but only the needle.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract the stone with the suction device, which we have found to be very effective.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not extracted in this way, then take a hook or an old device that has been used to remove the eyelashes, and place a small amount of it on the end of the needle, and then cover that area with a clean cloth.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the auditory canal to facilitate, and then dry the ear from the moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if all the causes that we have mentioned are not forgotten, then you should proceed to incise the part where the abscess or spasm occurred.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method for incising that part is to first sew the patient's vein of the saphenous and remove the suture according to the method of its virtue, and then make a small opening between your fingers and convert the wound edges upwards, and do not perform any deep incision in the area where the pain is most intense.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the opening is of lunar shape until it reaches the bone, and the bone is found, then use appropriate instruments to incise that part; and do so with the opening at that time with speed, and cure that part before it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause is one of the grasses that I have mentioned and is inflamed, then administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your instructions, then take a thin needle according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And apply that remedy to the patient who has fallen ill with that disease which is called gout in the earlobe.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not apply that remedy when you think that the patient has already been moistened by the vapor of the earlobe, and pause it over the affected area, and extract it with a needle or a subtle instrument, or at the beginning, as mentioned above, which is praised for its extraction.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	May the water that enters the earlobe be used as a sneeze conditioner at the beginning, and fill the patient's ear with an old cloth, and place a spoon over the ear in which the water is, and if it is removed by that, it is good; otherwise, take many small pearls according to the length of the mentioned one, and heat them in the fire for a short time, and the patient should put one of those pearls into the trachea of his ear and strike it with another pearl on the pearl inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not cease this remedy until all the water is boiled away.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when all the water is boiled away, take a piece of paper or cloth, and place one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until it is burned completely.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then place another cloth and make so many folds until all the water is boiled away, and then remove that which is below and is called the extraordinary stone of the remedy.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of beasts entering into that ear, if it is a small piece, use the same method as we have said in the division; but if it is a large piece that causes pain at the back of the throat, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and oncis, and the cause of it is the least of all the other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of worms that generate in the ear, when you treat that which we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not compare your treatment, then cover the ear with a sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if here appears some cause of worms, then extract that sharp or thin instrument, but if there is no cause, then take a narrow needle and wide above it, of which this is the form of it:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And enter the thin end into the earhole according to the amount that can be tolerated by the patient; and then quickly pull out the other with strong force, and do so until all the worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if they do not obey you with the instrument, then open and close it in the circuit of the candle as we have said; then administer distillations which have been used in the past in the treatment of worms, and look for that in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your effusion is the one that you pour into the earhole with this instrument, of which this is the form of it:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or copper, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and place it above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it should be used as needed in the cavity of the catheter here where it is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the ray and wrap it in the end of the catheter decently, and then pour oil into the cavity of the catheter, or some herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the catheter — and that is in the aurelha —, and then press the ray above and express the oil through your hand until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the catheter and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is in the aurelha should already have been heated by fire for a short time.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause which you will distill in the aurelha is not too cold, because the medicines of aurelha do not bear this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the cure of opthalmia of aurelhas.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some people who are born from the wombs of unperforated mothers have already experienced this in some men, opthalmia in the meat of the aurelha by plague or by no flesh at all in that; and this opthalmia is sometimes made in the front of the trau of the aurelha which does not know the excrement, and sometimes in the parts in front.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And in the case of the patient who does not understand the language, it is in the most difficult situations for healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the case where you succeed in understanding the language, cover the patient's ear with your hand and look at them.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an ointment applied, open the small, sharp needle of this shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it in which the width is small has one sharp part and the other not, and the needle is two lion widths long so as not to pierce the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the ointment is applied to the ear or to the meat of the patient, then open the small, sharp needles and insert them into that part with great ease before all the flesh is opened.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the ointment is applied to the front of the ear, then take a small, sharp needle and insert it into that part for a short distance, and then place it in the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if the patient has difficulty breathing due to the weight of the abdomen, the effort of lifting it causes further difficulty in breathing; and be careful not to compress the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place a piece of cloth of the second quantity according to the width of the trachea, which you have wrapped around the groin Egyptian style; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any medicine and insert it into the abscess and powder it over it according to the triple method and use it; and if you see that the ear has already become infected, then remove the infection and replace it with another one that you have wrapped in a piece of greased wax, until the infection is cautiously cured; and then care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If there is a flow of pus, then immerse a cloth or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another remedy that restricts the flow of pus, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the care of atezil, which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athezil, which occurs in the eyelids of some people due to a humid condition, and in others due to a dry condition.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should hold those eyes open or closed, and cut those eyelids from their roots, and place your hand over the areas according to the following.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If the pain is caused by cold blood flow, then you should cauterize those eyelids with a fine cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to cut and scrape those dry areas when they return to their original state; and when they are cauterized with fire, those eyelids are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Of the care of greatworms, which occur in the eyelids of some people.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	They occur due to some cause in the eyelids of some people, which is similar to greatworms in their strength and hardness, and because of this, they are called greatworms.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And there is an accumulation of thick moisture under and above the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation on them is considered if the large one comes out of that which appears from the eyelid and is moistened throughout; and the cause of it is unknown.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make an incision over that with a sharp instrument to facilitate its exit, and then suspend it with a thread and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not prepared for the incision of it and do not push it so that it does not penetrate the eyelid with the incision, then in no case will it be noticed.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and cure it within that which is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then it will not cause harm to that which the oil of it restores and envelops.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the large one declines towards the parts inside the eyelid, then open the eyelid and suspend it with a thread, another that you have chosen for incision, and press it throughout; and if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, then in no case will it be noticed.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then, approach the beginning, wash the wound with salted water; and treat the area with what is inside that will heal it.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	About the treatment of eyelids above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is gray matter that is produced in the tissues of the eyelid above, and mainly affects children, worsening their wounds and causing them to lose their sight; and they cannot see the light of the sun because tears gather in those.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you often see them talking to the corners of their eyes all the time, and to the corners of their eyes while they sleep; and those are the eyelids behind their brows, which have been covered by inflammation, and the appearance of pus is in the wound; and when you press the area with the tips of your fingers, you can feel the pus inside.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And sometimes the operation is performed on that person who lies on his back and places his head on the bed, and then place a cloth under him and over him, and make a circle according to the amount of pus contained in all parts, and then place that above it and press with the tips of your fingers from all sides so that the pus is accumulated in the middle of the circle, and then perform an incision in the middle of that humidity with a sharp instrument so that the wound does not become too large.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the first incision you make in the abdomen, go as deep as possible until you reach the peritoneum, where in the most dislocated processes, the peritoneum is usually cut according to the form of white goose.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract those clots that you have wrapped between the thighs, called parts of the uterus, and revolve them between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to push through the incision so that the sperm does not reach the bladder and the other falls away.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If you do not find any sperm at the beginning of the incision, then push through the incision a small forceps until you reach the other; and then extract that which we have said; and underneath, moisten cloths with warm water and place them over the area and strengthen those wool pads.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And remember that they sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the incision to prevent that which is remaining from that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which has been healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an abscess occurs in the area, then cure it with healing ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of the methods of touching the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of wounds are not adjusted by their natural hairs and are antiquated, then touch those to the wound and make methods of evils as such with frequent tears and softening of the eyelids and cloth until that which is causing destruction of the wound, which is called tactinir of the wound, and cure it in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done by incision and suture; or by cannulas as I have said.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore cover that you place the cap of the wound on your left hand; then convert the eyelid of the wound to your left hand, and if it is converted, it is good; and if not, insert a needle in the part where it is most likely to be near the edge of the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate above, and that which is on the edge of the eyelid, near the hairs, and pull the thread above to the palpebra, and convert it to the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then insert a needle in the part of the eyelid behind the eyelashes, adjusting it with the incisors of the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and then remove the hair and place it behind the eyelid, covering it with small cotton or cloth, and then place a tent over the eyelid, and it should be as in the shape of a fan.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But it is important to note that the shape varies according to the degree of eyelid elevation, which differs among men, and those who require it to be incised from the eyelid by a large amount according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then insert a needle in the two lines that you have sutured, and begin from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural hairs, it should be as large as the largest of the king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the onion in one of the two corners of the coda, and then scrape it all, and then adjust the suture with the two lips of wool or thin wool, and remove the drainage, and make that which superfluously over the two eyelids stick to some causes enveloping, if you want to do that, and otherwise, don't care.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then remove the stitches from the wound after three or four days, and care for that area.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you wish, leave the stitches in place and care for that area with a dry and constricting bandage, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and its adhesion; however, stitches are better. Therefore, do not remove them prematurely.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, it is important to be careful when dealing with the patient, and it is a good operation, not due to fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in taxanir, and it is that you place a figure of a mirror on the eyelid, and then raise the eyelid at a three-inch angle and gather it according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do that, then hold the eyelid at a three-inch angle, and if it is not equal, then take a needle with thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other needle through the lacrimal major, and the second needle through the lacrimal minor, and adjust the threads so that they are equal, and then raise your hand to the same height as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is not healed yet.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If a blister occurs on your finger or in the fold of your skin, cover that blister with wax and the same kind of ointment, and apply it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Some eyelids are attached to the eyeball by their own eyelashes, so cover that with what we have said about the wound; but stitching in the place where it is more natural.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To stitch the tendons is as follows:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and then you turn the eyelid and cut the figure that is hidden according to what I have said; and then make two thin threads of those that length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be narrower than the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already incised at the ends of each section where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add each thread to the excess of the eyelid from the side, and tighten the threads of each section with a strong tension, and leave that for several days, until the scar from the tension dies and is rejected and will rot within that if it does not become infected.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is too late, then break the lumps and cure the pain until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not prick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make cans that you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	About raising prickly hairs in the eyelid when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are not natural, hard, rough, and prickly hairs, then the operation is to take a thin needle and place it in a soft and sharp cedar wood, and adjust the ends of it and the nails in a way that is very thin.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the needles should be as long as one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you can make another thin needle next to it in a short time, and use the ends of that one if you want.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and position yourself close to the sunlight so that your work is clearly visible, because this is a delicate and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the eyelid at the point that requires it, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly before it goes beyond the natural limit of the eye.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the eyelid upwards and insert that into the conjunctiva, and keep the eyelids open one to three or more but not too many.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand out from where the needle is inserted into the conjunctiva and into the eyelid, keeping it within the natural limit of the eye.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is inserted too deeply and the eyelid does not move, then insert it into the parts that you have composed at that place, until it moves away from the trauma.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then look at the eye from the side, because when you move it and the eyelid, it will move and close, and leave it closed for two or three days until the needle has adhered to its place and healed over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the skin is too short, then adjust a longer bandage from the natural ones, and raise it to the one that allows it to be stretched out almost flat, and then raise that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	About the cure of ehrich which is in the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the ehrich is in the eye socket and the eyelid contracts when it is turned upwards, to the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the plague or dryness or cauterization, and this ehrich is natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor consolidation of the plague or dryness or cauterization, or by similar conditions.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the method of the operation in that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it in that which is between those a cloth of linen, and tie them together when they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not use treatment of it from the causes which dry and constrict; because if you do that it returns to ehrich worse than at any time they did not have fire.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that case which has a softening effect like fenugreek, and apply it as a poultice with the water in which they are soaked and boiled, or with linseed oil, which should be liquefied with some of the oils, and apply it to the affected area, and cure it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your treatment is that you pierce everything that is not consolidated according to the form in which fire has been used from the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation, which we have said, is nothing more than a correction of the distortion that does not return the form of the area according to what fire has given.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of ehratic that is made in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This distortion that is made in the eyelid, which is not named vertadierament distortion; and it is of two kinds, one natural, another accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental distortion is made by pressure or by cutting or by cauterization or by other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle in which you make double thread, and place it on the flesh, and make it pass from the lacrimal of the left eye into the lacrimal of the right eye, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the flesh to the parts above the needle and place it on the needle, and insert it into the wide space.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the eyelid returns to its original shape, good; otherwise, take the ray and place it on the broken figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make both cuts on the side of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And make the ends of both cuts into two angles of the incision, which you have made when they converge, and make the angle of them into a figure of their own.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter lambda: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then place the flesh on that for the length that is on the side of the eye, which closes the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and tie them with wool thread; and then take care of those that we have said about the softening medicines and the poultices inside which it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the laceration is caused by a wound or suture or cauterization, then cover it with a flat incision on the eyelid according to what is prescribed.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the poultice between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the sermon on the cure of lacerations when it is raised or lowered, that the blood flow in the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of laceration, and that is in the form of various shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the craftsmen always prepare an instrument in each possible way that is possible to do inside which it can return the figure to its natural form, or close to that, and that patient according to what suits the operation and tools in the best positions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in men who have their eyelid fixed above the white of the eye, preventing free movement and natural works, then you should remove the extraneous ray from under the eyelid, and elevate it above, or extend it to the edge.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you should insert a thin needle into the adhesion, which is not sharp enough to cause pain, so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and leave the needle in place without damaging the eye.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be made with ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you should place salt water in the eye, which you have washed; or apply a solution of chamomile in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate the eyelid and eye with a cloth, and place your hand over the eye to prevent it from opening, and use third-day urine from a healthy person as a remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of the beginning of the nail and the height of flesh from the lacrimal bones.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You should know that the nail is of two kinds, either nervous, resembling a thin, hard shell; or non-nervous, resembling white matter congealed, which when it touches the bone, is easily detached and the bone is not stuck in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And the species do not begin until the greater lacrimal bone, which gradually covers the vision and prevents light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The worker places the patient's head in a chin rest, and then raises the eyelids with his hand, and elevates the eyelid with his hand, and then collects the nail from the bone with a pair of tweezers and extends it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert it into the nail, or of cavalry or of buffalo or of a similar animal, or of strong iron, or double the tip of the needle gradually and place it in the middle of the nail, and pierce it with the needle, and tie it to the nail; and extend it to the parts above, and scrape off the skin on the side of the nail that is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And if you continue to push the needle through the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And if you then insert the narrow needle into the opening of the lacrimal duct, using thin forceps or small forceps, to remove the flesh of the lacrimal gland so that it does not continue to produce a continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes use the needle on the sole of the foot, as mentioned earlier, and then remove it using this type of needle:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the corneal tunic with the needle and that it does not cause a rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then insert the needle into the wound a few times with some salt or powder made of sinapium, and remove it after a while; and take care that it does not cause any harm.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the needle is not sharp and you cannot insert it, or it does not stick in that place on the sole of the foot, then use this type of needle to cure it with medicines, and it will be healed as mentioned in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to incise that, then first you open the clothing of the patient and take a thin, sharp lancet of fine steel sharpness according to this form:
am subtilitat.	am subtilitat.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is thinned and curved and enters into that place, then sprinkle some of your own urine in the clothing of the chest made of linen or with rose oil or with salt triple, and cover the chest with the other side.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until everything that is in it has been removed, except that the contrary abscess should be in the clothing, because then you will leave that, and cure the abscess at the beginning so that it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The indication of the flesh of the lacrimal duct, if it is not felt through the clothing for great harm, should be suspended by an ounce; and incise that from that one part, and do not close the incision so that you do not close the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then drip in the lacrimal canal, make him sleep until he is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the beginning of a certain disease and of that which is born from flesh adjusted on the hook.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes flesh is born on the hooks, and it is overlaid before it covers the pupil, or it approaches or stretches out over the eyelids and strongly grasps the eyelids to the parts deformed and is assembled at the rose of the balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation is done by the patient placing his head on the chin; and then opening the hooks of that one and gathering all that flesh with scissors, and it is with a forceps or a hook; and then incising the flesh at the beginning until it is finished with the scissors, and guard yourself from the hook that you do not descend that one of your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision is the one that you incise those or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps which are collected as soon as it comes to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then, when your incision is completed and the entire flesh is removed, fill the wound with salt-crusted powder, or distill it into the dust and similar to the corrosive medicines, and place over the wound a piece of cloth soaked in honey until it is certain that an abscess has formed.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause for alarm and the wound is not healing properly, and you fear an abscess has formed, then cleanse the wound and treat that abscess with a remedy that melts away that abscess, and repeat this operation until it is healed, and similarly treat the flesh that has been affected in this way.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must first ensure that all wound healing is done naturally or by accidental means, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you have made sure that that member has suffered that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the collection of serum in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	When the veins are swollen and hardened on the leg and prevent the doctor from performing their operation, they lengthen the leg over days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the leg in which it is swollen is strong and not another disease that is swollen, then collect that swelling.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And if you command the patient to raise their head in your hand, and suspend those veins with an ermine or two according to your judgment; and that ermine should be of delicate double thickness according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two ermine gradually in a coat according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gather those veins with thin forceps, with delicacy, and wipe away the pus frequently, before they become red and swollen on the leg and are rolled up.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to damage the leg at its extremities; and if your operation in the morning causes the skin to peel off, and you have a firm hand in your operation, do not incise except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then you dilute the hot water or vinegar that remains from the sabre in the wound.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	However, if you cannot obtain all of it at that time, then apply the entire amount of what reduces the pain of it, and leave it on for several days until the pain is reduced and the risk of abscess is avoided.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the process until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of hernias to the navel.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure hernias with cauteries or sharp medicines after the story of it has not been healed, then do not insert into it but rather incise over the abscess to mature its contents and remove all the moisture that is in it and the pus until the bone is discovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is discovered and it is corrupt or black in it, then you remove it with a tool of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named for a hard head, and made of iron, and the head should be round like the one that has been punctured by a lancet or a scalpel for a subtle puncture (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the location corrupted by the bone, and gradually rotate it between your thumbs, and press your hand gently until you know that that corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And do that several times, and then restore the location with drying and styptic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the location is consolidated and it is in good flesh and the body is free from the disease and it has lasted for forty days, and it does not recur, does not become an abscess, and no accident happens in it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and in this manner: and you should take a second bone or an acute medical instrument, and when you have exposed the bone, then take a tribune in this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The external part of the iron is triangular, and its end is first extended into the extremity as if it were a spike.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place that one over the bone, and another near the lacrimal; and let your hand hold a little of the water, and then let your hand rotate it around the tribe until it penetrates the entire bone, and the patient feels pain as if it were entering his body.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, then restore the place with drying astringent remedies as you have seen.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter that flowed into the parts of the body returns to its source, so that is more like a wound on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of the reduction of the elevation of the water.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the water elevates to its totality and does not cause harm or decrease in the excretion, then let the patient lie down, and let him follow that, and let you place some bandages on his neck for good suction; and let you place a liniment on the water made of pitch, aloe, salt, and sarcocolla, and let you strengthen the plaster on the water with powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The method of cleaning the feet is to take cloths made of lion's mane, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; then make those parts.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then place one on top of the other according to the amount needed for the required purpose.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then apply strong pressure with the cloth, made of durable, strong material; and repeat the succussions on the wounds; then remove the cloths and let the wound heal during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If the ligament becomes soft, then it should be kept straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then remove the ligament as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound has already been reduced, then apply the ointment to the feet and the wound and the cloths until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the beginning of the elevation of the choroid membrane.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the choroid membrane, and it elevates and protrudes through the eyelids like a sharp object, and takes on the form of a person, and you want to incise it, then the operation is done as we have recommended, which is that you insert the needle into the edge of the choroid from below, and then place another needle double the size of the lacrimal part above it, and make that penetrate, and let the first needle follow its position; and then incise the location of the doubled part and lift that part of the choroid around the needle, and apply strong pressure on that part.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place it on the woolen cloth soaked in album of egg whites and let it rest until the thread is pulled through the goose's eye.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for that part where the pain is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some cotton is gathered from all parts and placed in a circle inside the wool, adjusting its height to be equal, and then perforate it with a thin spatula until it reaches the surface of the wool, and let the albumen moisture descend, and then lower the wool and insert it immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of cataracts.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease, which is called cataracts, is not other than a waterfall that descends into the wool and is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of working in it is that the patient should sit on the prepared and adjusted chair, and then take the upper part of your hands in two parts and hold that one where you see the disease arriving at the affected parts, and then let it dry and not descend, and let the light be, and the patient will see the causes as he usually does.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not come down in the foot, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	Then, if it is not prepared for the descent to the skin, take that which we have said, and make the patient lie between your hands, and then take a thin sponge and moisten it with that, and place it on the conjunctiva and tunica cornea in the cornea (entering into the eye), until it is completely absorbed.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, when it is completely absorbed, you will distill water with a tail of water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already prepared fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it from the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure of water descending from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the species of water in the division and which is suitable for piercing according to the speech declared, then that one second to healing.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you should make the patient lie between your hands on a cushion and cover their eye, then press it firmly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your hand on the side of their eyelid, if the water is on the right side; or place your hand directly on the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And take hold of the right eye with your right hand, if the water is on the left side; or hold the left eye with your left hand.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the tip of your finger near the cornea over the thickest part of the eye's white on the side of the lower eyelid, and then gently touch the eyeball with it and rotate your hand in that direction.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that your finger has reached the cause of the swelling.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And note that the length of your finger is equal to the distance between the pupil and the end of the eyelid, which is the cornea; because you will see the pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And place your finger in the location where the water is, and then quickly turn your hand over another one, so if the water descends at first, then first wipe the patient's eye with that cloth, and place your finger in their eyelid.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then rest for a short while; if the water is descending, then pause at that other stage in front of you where it is not yet gathered.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is dry and not descending, then extract the gathered water with ease, and gently rub your hand on the wound little by little, and then dissolve in the water a small piece of clear gemstone salt; and then place that cloth outside the wound, or infuse a stopper or linen infused with rose oil and album of egg and bind it to the wound.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we and those who have lived in our time use album of egg instead.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey the instrument of the wound due to its hardness - which is one of those men whose wound is very hard - then gently take the spatula that is called the handle of this type:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce it at that conjunction, and do not let your hand in the trough, and do not say if you did not make a subtle way to the water.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then enter the second ingredient that we have mentioned.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should prepare the patient for the operation, which is done when they are lying on their back in a dark room, and prohibited from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place your hand on the patient to calm their nature and not cause harm to their head or any other part.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the bandage be according to their condition until the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove it from that dark room and extract the free view, and let the patient see some causes, and then return the bandage within the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not let it be done at the hour of cures or too soon, the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having been allowed to do that because the water can be more effectively and forcefully poured out.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs, then let it be removed after the seventh day, and correct that with the water that causes the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When you have finished examining them, place your hand on their face to control their vomiting, which exists in the deepest darkness.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Then gently lift them from that darkness and discuss their causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in some cases, the disciple of vision is not excused from certain operations, and then you should be skilled in the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already reached some of those that are in the Arctic, and some say that fire is made in the air by piercing the water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, we have not seen such a thing in our land that has performed this, nor is it found in any of the books of the ancients; and it may be new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magic by which one can overcome those who ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of earth or iron properly, and their external parts are like this triangle, the sharp end being like that form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure of flesh in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose different fleshy masses are assembled, which is caused by some reason that is similar to a scorpion of fish, or a polyp; and this disease is called a polypus, which is like the representation of that fish.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from there is cancerous flesh, which is black in color; and from there is flesh that is not black in color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those fleshy masses that are not fraudulent or cancerous, you should make the patient sweat between your hands and place it in the sunlight, and wipe the nose of them, and pick out the tumor from among those fleshy masses.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the parts of the foreskin, and then cut off that which you have comprehended from among those fleshy masses with a sharp tool under which you know that all the flesh has been stopped; because if there is any cause for which the abscission is possible, then later you should remove that with one of the delicate tools with which it can be removed.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the lord has swelling or an abscess that has not been opened, then pause there with a poultice; or it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cover and cauterize that area where the pus has been completely drained and all the cavities have been closed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then apply a cold compress on the nose, close to the beginning of the nostril where the blood is coming from.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is opened and moisture enters into the palate, then you know that it has been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not enter after applying the poultice, then you know that there is no flesh in the swollen tissues of the nose where the pus has not been drained.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, cover that place with a thin cloth where there is some swelling, and apply pressure in the mouth, and pause between each pressure for the amount of time or measure that is necessary, and guide the patient and insert one end of the cloth into the nose to hold it or another cause that is possible at that time.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when that is done, bring the patient's nose close to the opening of the nostrils, and place it on his gently, as many children in school do this action, and it is the likely cause for that person who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place both of the patient's extremities on his nose and the other in his nostrils, and administer a carnivorous animal in his nose, and do that when you know that the meat is already in his nose.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the patient, and place in his nostril the abstraction of saint's blood, and do that for three days or more until the tongue corrodes all that is in his nose.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, place in his nostril a plumb cannula through which he will be cured.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if it does not cure, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to purge the nose with which they are distilled oils and medicines in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do that with silver or earthenware, which is similar to a small lantern uncovered, with a small bowl, and the meat in the same way.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed canula like this with a straw, and the canula of the instrument to be used as a purgative and is flat, uncovered; at which hand you hold when you remove the oil or that water you want from the sucs and from the causes suctiblas.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this is how you make the purgative: recipe of horsehair, of white clay, of ginger, of pepper of saffron, of long pepper, of escaphragus, of epitym of spice and an unc. as if you made the suc of blood and of calf, and these are made into pills, and one pill is dissolved in a tebeza water, and it is given to the patient's nose just entered.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About the nostrils on the outside.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	When the veins in the nose are swollen and appear outside of their normal position, and they are magnified and swollen on other days when they are not properly cared for.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	To prevent that, you should insert it at the beginning of the appearance of the symptoms, and continue with that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place your hand or cautery or medicine over the area where it is located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	However, if the appearance of the symptoms is delayed until it becomes magnified, then consider whether it is hard, black in color and has little sensation, because those swollen veins that have inserted this pus into that person have caused great harm to that person.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the pus is yellow and not black in color, and the appearance of the symptoms is possible at any time, then evacuate the patient and insert that remedy, and cure the area with what dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of sutures of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by pressure or similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it is not recommended to perform surgery on all men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, if someone has any cause of those, which you consider whether it is fresh pressure or its wound, then adjust the two lips of the wound to suture, and care for that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then consider that you excise each part of their skin until it does not become infected.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips to suture and strengthen those, and above them powder dragon's blood and triple salt, and place a thin layer of diachylon plaster or any other consolidating plaster on the powder, leave that for two days or three, and then remove that and replace that plaster and care for that until the wounds have healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the suture needle be such that you add the solution of continuity or have needles as we have recommended in the abdominal suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you have done and inform.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	About the extraction of those causes that come in the women's genitalia in the parts divided.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Some hard abscesses similar to pus-filled cysts in men's genital parts of their labia, and sometimes they are smaller and sometimes larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	So that you convert the labia and each of those hardnesses of that part, and empty the abscess with a syringe into the location of three fingers until the wound is strengthened, and then wash it with vinegar and cure the location with that which has stiptic properties, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	About the beginning of flesh adjusted in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great number of vagabonds lay on the gums adjusted to the flesh, which the ancients called albus, therefore cover that you suspend it on a cloth or that you hold it with forceps and insert it into its place, and leave the saliva flow or let it dry.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then place your hand on the wound site or another stanching or astringent powder.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then secondarily insert it and cauterize it, because the cauterizer will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the reason for iron teeth.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth of the parts of the jaw and between the gums, scraped, rough, and some vagabonds are black and are made yellow or green before that through corruption they pass to the gum and the teeth become yellow.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then make the patient sit between your legs and place the head of the patient on your shoulder, and remove the teeth in which those scrapes and similar sand appear before any cause is removed, and that makes black and yellow and other colors before they are modified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If that is not the case, then proceed with the ratio on those areas on the other day and the second and third times until it reaches the end statement in which you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	You should know that the teeth have required variously shaped tools and different figures according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so that you know which tool is used to shave the part of the tooth and another tool used to shave between the teeth in different shapes, and these shapes of tools should be prepared by you, as you will see soon:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	That you cure the tooth of its pain from beginning to end in the extraction of it, that there is no cause that delays the withdrawal of the tooth when it is extracted, that is a sublimated substance within which extraction is performed.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May it be that when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, that you must certainly be certain of which tooth is causing pain, because sometimes the patient confuses the pain with a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is extracted, which we have already seen in the operation of the teeth.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then, since you must determine which tooth is causing the pain, and you know how, cut around the tooth with some tool that has some usefulness, until it is dissolved from the gum on all sides, and then remove that with the forceps, or with fine tweezers starting small and gradually until that is done.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then, with a large, strong loop for good speech or extraction, place the patient's head between your two thumbs that you hold so that it does not move, and then extract the tooth in a straight manner so that it does not touch the patient or cause them greater pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And then, if it is not forgotten, take one of those tools, and place it under the tooth on all sides to facilitate and ease the removal of that which is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or worn, cut that break and tighten that with a fine wire so that it does not break in the moment of your construction on that with the forceps.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And cover that you work carefully with incision around the entire part of the gum and guard your strength so that it does not tear from there, and return over the patient for the malice that is greater than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And guard yourself that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their practice and audacity for the eradication of them, which they do not administer to us as we have recommended; for many wicked people bring great evils upon men, which are more difficult than those that are quadrupled, and all their reasons remain, or some of those, or that they extract from there with ignorant wickedness as many testimonies have shown.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And the eradication of it should be washed the mouth with vinegar or with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there are flows of pus through the wound, as many have said, then cut off some amount of sponge and sprinkle it on the wound, and if that does not compare to that sponge, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and holding them subtly with the ones that are praised for their long, thin jaws at the beginning, short handle and thick, so that they would not bend when performing those tasks.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And if there are times of thick handles entering that when they are new, they would not be bent, then they are short jaws.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are made of Indian steel or right-angled jaws, and in the jaws of those ones have teeth of which some are inserted into others and they are made with great strength, and sometimes they are shaped like the beak of a ciconia, which is called a crane, so it is held, and they are very strong.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the removal of teeth and extraction of bones from the jaws that are impacted.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you have to remove a tooth that is impacted due to some cause, then first place your hand over the location close to the jaw for one day or two until that location becomes soft; and then enter with anesthesia or hold the jaws of which they are shaped like the beak of a ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The external parts of their thighs were cut with a knife or an axe.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if they do not obey your commands and these forceps or hold them, then carefully cut around the wound and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument that has the name of the talon, which is a small saw with this form:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if it is of short length and thick, use a small one, not too large so that it does not become crooked.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Then if the wound is opened, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which the following are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular blade in which there is a groove:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more slender tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you have helped yourself with this instrument having two handles of which the following is the form:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And other instruments which I will describe for the extraction of teeth; because it is well done with this instrument which resembles an ice pick, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the triangular extreme part that is twisted or short, which is some swelling, and not thinly enough to be a triangle.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And other wise that the instruments of teeth are similar to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the skilled and subtle artists in this art be able to perform this operation and treat various diseases; for some of these diseases are different from others in their forms of various species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	May it be thinly enough to be a triangle if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are triangular, or if they are rotten, then carefully treat that part which is convenient for this operation and the forceps we have mentioned in the extraction of the teeth roots, and help you with how to handle this:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is some swelling little by little, and it is stretched or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak until the bone of all is fully removed; then restore the place with appropriate medicines for this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small pustule on the bone, then prick that pustule and its black center, and cure it within so that it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	About the care of prominent teeth above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent and do not naturally follow their own course, and especially when they occur in women, and especially in revered virgins, you should consider: if one tooth is not close to another, and there is no possibility of a bridge or ligament from it, then you should remove that tooth; but if it is not connected to another tooth, then you should incise it with this instrument whose shape is like this; and it is similar to a pig's trough, and should be made of Indian iron with an extra-sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And if your incision is in the area where you incised it in three days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it is not connected to another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed to the gum, then you should file it with this file of Indian iron whose shape is like this:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And if all the iron is from India and the hammer is also of the same kind; and if the points are made with a pointed tool like a lion's tooth, which are made into needles, which should be sharpened little by little in different days for convenience, so that there is no other tooth that is worn out and broken.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then draw lines along the bone, and shave it with a razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if there is a tooth that a part of it is drilled and the tongue is exposed, then cover that hole with something that the roughness of that fraction is stopped and covered, and filled so that the tongue does not descend or the word is not corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of worn out teeth with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents happen to the teeth due to impact or fall, and the patient cannot bear it, and you have treated it with hemostatic medicines, and your treatment has not been effective, then use gold wire instead of silver, because silver becomes green and soon becomes poor, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And if the bone is so fragile and rough according to how much can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reccio is that you grasp the bone and take double of it between two healthy teeth, and approach that it increases am two tortuosities of the bone between two muddy ones, or if one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the task in the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and knowledge until it is not muddy.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your string should be the one that strengthens the bone from the roots of the teeth that do not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess parts of the bone with forceps or pliers, and add those to each place according to your gesture, and convert them into those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the muddy one, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let that tight space be as in Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is dislocated or broken, strengthen it with that or those other bones in such a manner that they are all connected during the entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of healthy teeth and the figure of straightness of two healthy teeth and two crooked ones, as follows:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done that the tooth or teeth return to their proper place in such locations, and they are regrown as we have recommended, and remain straight.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this is not done by just any skilled and knowledgeable person.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some of these bones are suitable for certain causes of cow's bones, and they are made into teeth in such a manner as follows: they are placed in a location where the tooth is missing, and they are strengthened as we have said, and remain and serve well for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	About the beginning of the ligament that is in the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that is located behind the tongue, some of which are made from certain bones or is natural to the person, or is an accidental and has become solidified.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is to remove the patient's mouth from their face, their tongue existing on the chin; and lift their tongue, and then insert a ligament nerve according to the latitude where the tongue ends in its recency.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any difficulty or resistance in that place, and this is due to the consolidation of plague, then you should give an incision and divide it according to the latitude where the ligament has been inserted and the resistance has been dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful that no incision is made in the flesh of the carcass and that you divide here an arc and let out blood flow from the sinew.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the footprints of the incision with warm water or vinegar or warm water; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from moving again so that another movement is not consolidated.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is blood flow from the sinew, place your hand over the third rib; if the sinew goes away, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery that is suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then approach those other causes that are needed to be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter thirty-five.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, certain swellings on the tongue, similar to a small abscess, prevent the tongue from performing its natural operation; and if they are not treated soon enough, they can fill the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in this case is to open the mouth of the patient facing the sunlight and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it as dark or black, hard, to which the patient does not feel pain, then do not touch that part.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is declined to a white color, in which there is moisture, then you put the needle in it, and insert a thin sponge into it, and cut it from all parts; and if pus comes out during your operation, then pause above the patient's throat, as it is vinegar, until it is restricted.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work before you have completed it, before it is washed with warm water and salt; and cure the other with the same treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36:
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from the armpits and those that are in the groin and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess occurs in the groin, it is the glands that are similar to wool, which are deformed and are called armpits, which when you cure them with what we have said in the division and do not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, and little pain, then do not touch it with a knife.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the pus is thick, then do not touch it with a knife for fear of infection; leave it alone until it matures, and then either you will break it or it will break by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, thin, and the pus of it is thin, then that should be lanced.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation in him is that you consider, during your operation, whether the abscess of him has completely healed or if it has decreased at all; and then do so by turning the patient on his side, with his head on your hand, and open his mouth, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of him, and the instrument is a noble one of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then when you press that tongue against the abscess, and catheterize over that your hand, then take an onion and place it in the wound, and pull those out as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that you take from the membranes, and then incise it with the instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, but the outer parts of which are curved, so that the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, sharp, the one being made of iron and thin.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not at your present, then insert the pointed end of that which has this form: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have inserted one needle, insert the other according to this method of insertion, and then guard the patient from cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a flow of blood, guard the patient from cold water, use decoction of wormwood or elderberry and similar to those that are hemostatic within which the blood flow is restricted, and then care for it until it is cured.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes blisters are also found in the groin and other abscesses or those two boils, and insert them according to what I said in the insertion of two needles equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in her groin, the abscess tended to a dark color, of little pain, which had already closed her groin, and the woman breathed very straight, and had already prohibited eating and drinking water, and was already reached death if more waited for a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had grown so much that it had pushed two ribs inside, pressing on two ribs.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So you correctly made an incision in one of them, and pulled out that one, and took out a large portion from it, and then you incised the other part where you understood the other wound, and closed the mouth of that, and covered their tongue, and then you squeezed the incision into that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you took out a large amount of pus from it, but it did not flow from it, but only a little bit of sanctum.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	And then the whole body of that woman was completely covered with it, and soon afterwards she began to urinate water, and then you did not cease incising from that abscess for a long time, and another abscess formed in place of that one, which continued to grow.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So you applied a bandage and cauterized the wound of it, and then you continued to dress it; and then you walked around and did not know what God had done for that woman.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter thirty-seven.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From the beginning of labor when it becomes obstructed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh occurs in the uterus, and it becomes obstructed and prolonged, then it is not named perpendicularly; and if it is in the part that is thick and round, then it is called a bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When the condition we mentioned in the division is cured, and you do not compare your treatment, and if you have already seen that an obstruction has been removed from it and is thin, then cut that which is round; and if it is at a certain length, and is bloody, of dark or black color, and not in the center, then cut the beginning of it, where there is danger to the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that the second, as I have said of its whiteness and length, then make the patient lie down and place the tongue of it with an instrument that processes its shape and puts the onion in the new place, and pull that down and cut it with one of the two instruments that are called in the beginning of two needles.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And if you do not insert that but rather what is adjusted over the natural term of its addition, then if you insert it from there, you will damage its language.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then use what we have recommended for insertion in the insertion of two women, and cure that within which it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient was frightened by the insertion of that, then use the method of cauterization with its fears, and the way of holding the cauterizing instrument in your hand is not other than sharp water, and you should place the cap of the patient on your head, and then take the instrument we have mentioned, and take some of the water we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and apply it to that living cause, and do not press too hard or subtly, and from that fill the hollow of the instrument which has this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The external part of that in its cavity where the medicine is placed over the spoon, and the patient lies on their side to prevent saliva or mucus from the mouth of that through the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not cause any harm to that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And approach your hand with the medicine, and apply it to the uvula for the space of about an hour until that becomes discolored and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around the end of the reed, and immerse the cloth in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cloth into a small tube until that adheres to the tube, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and leave it there for three days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and after the cauterization wash the area around the uvula with a soft cloth in the circumference of the medicine, and change that which is in the circumference of the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and apply ointment afterward, and give garglings until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of cure is more safe and longer than the beginning and end of the fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some ulcers are cured by applying a substance that is more subtle than cauterization, which is cured by means of fumigation in this manner: take camomile, hyssop, origanum, rue, Arabic scicados, camomilla, broyda and similar herbs to those of the plants, and adjust all these causes or some of them in a bath, and they are submerged in very hot water and boiled; and the bath should be well washed with decent soap, and there should be a trough over it, above which a suitable instrument made of iron according to this method should be placed; it should be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the end should be inserted into the mouth of the patient before the steam reaches the uvula over the quill, before the uvula becomes obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And apply this remedy to those ulcers before they dry, and remember that you should not perform this cure at the onset of abscesses, because it would be too harsh for the abscess, and do not make this remedy unless you are sure of the diagnosis of the abscess.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument present, then take a stick and place a piece of wood in its mouth, so that the patient's mouth is covered, because the piece of wood prevents the smoke from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of thorns and of that which sticks to the sole and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Foreign bodies stick to the sole or in the foot or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then see what you remove from those that are visible, above which catches the sight, because you should use an instrument designed for the sole, so that it is clear what is in the sole.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which is not visible and is hidden in the sole, see what you make the patient vomit, because the cause attached to the sole is often expelled by vomit; or that the patient swallowed a pea of bread or a piece of rice or a small amount of dry bread; or took a sponge of sea sponge and soaked it well in water, and then placed it on the sole, because when it reaches the place where the thorns are and are extracted, it is expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And then take an eel and roast it over a fire, and remove the bones and skin; or take a pork chop and remove the skin and fat.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if you do not forget those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of the following form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be as thick as a straw, and at the end of it, there is a cavity that you insert into the patient's mouth to facilitate.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And the agate is held elevated in the patient's mouth, and be careful that the touch of the sieu bone of the neck, so that it does not cause harm to the patient or the instrument, or what the doctor puts on his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But if the patient feels pain from that inserted instrument, because of his knowledge of the location of the cause and he pushes it downwards, and pulls his hand up with the instrument, then do so according to the amount that is prepared in time before it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	The extraction of blood from the vein attached to the buttock.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the blood is treated with what we have said in the division of the cure of medicines and not comfrey, consider this in the buttock of the patient during the sunlight, as you have understood the tongue of it with the instrument that you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the blood, extract it with a small needle or with a fine incision carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to withdraw it, then take a concave needle and insert it into the buttock of the patient, and place your hand on the concavity of the needle, and hold an ignited iron there, and do this as many times (until the blood is dead and does not come out of the buttock) and keep the patient from drinking all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a full wet cloth, and work the mouth of it in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not wipe any cause from it and let the water stand for an hour, then another on its hand, where the blood is as cold as water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not forgotten, you should smoke the patient with chamomile or asafetida using the instrument recommended for smoking in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do that, in four days.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another way of operation in suffumigation of that, is that you take an oven in which there are burning coals and the oven should be covered with a blanket in the middle of which there is a hole, and it should be placed in that hole the end of the instrument; and then lift the suffumigation; and place the patient's mouth on the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not lost until you know that the suffumigation has reached the sanctification, which takes four days.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not heal, then repeat the suffumigation after more days, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salted and other foods, and not drinking water, and if necessary, this regimen should be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids when they are visible; it is similar to forceps, but with some curvature in a certain place.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed on the hemorrhoid, and its tip is similar to the beak of a heron, which grasps, in which it is smeared with lime, so that when it encounters any cause, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the main part of the speech on the treatment and cutting of abscesses.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are special types of masses, according to the memory of their appearance, each in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are different in puncture and incision, according to the following methods, one of which is for the special type of abscesses that can be directly opened; and because it understands the humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the places where the disease occurs, such as the abscess on the head is different from the abscess on the buttocks; and the abscess in the fleshy part is different from the abscess at the joint; and each of them has its own incision for surgery.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And more about abscesses, some of which require not to be pierced until their maturation in those places or their suppuration.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses which require to be lanced when they are ripe, and not matured according to their condition, just like abscesses that are near joints, where an abscess that is approaching a joint, its cause is prolonged until the pus inside it is removed, and often the tendons or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a main member, and if you delay the piercing of it until it is matured, it will not be saved from the main member; or it is near the anus, so lance that unmatured one; and do not lance it crudely, but rather the one that is near the anus, so that the pus of it does not spread and is prolonged to the parts inside the anus, and is made a fistula, or that it is done in the term of it that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When you know the time of rupture of the abscess, it is then that it is mature.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is mature when the swelling of pain and the cessation of fever, and the decrease of headache and pulse, and the increase of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you know that the puncture should be made in the place closest to the abscess and from which healing will come from the maturity of the abscess.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The puncture should be made quickly through the long bones of the body or the body, if the abscesses are in the joints of the arms or legs, and in the locations of the tendons of the nerves, of the arches; and at the back, in all equal places where it does not reflect; because in those that reflect, use puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in fleshy places, it is customarily said that you should not make the puncture until it is confirmed that the digestion of it has been completed, as we have said; because if you puncture that one before, the length of the limb of the patient is prolonged and the movement of it is slow, and very often the lips of the wound are hardened and the depth of it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	When an abscess is perforated according to the size of the flesh or the need, or according to what the member indicates.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And when you administer small perforation, and in large abscesses great perforation and wide or deep incisions according to the difference in the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other abscesses in which it is necessary that the cavity be filled and closed, when made so that it does not open again, like those that occur in swellings of the groin and in buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that have three-angled incisions; and of those that are made like the shape of a sickle, like the abscesses of the armpits.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those that are made with round and crescent-shaped incisions, like those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	When the one that is not like those is superficial abscesses, then you should make a shallow incision or only plan it.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, do not hesitate to lance it, as you would not want to extract all the pus in one hour; taking out a part, and the next day putting in the abscess, and then taking out a larger part, and doing this gradually until it is fully drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is very weak, or a woman in labor, or a child, or an elderly person, as the animal spirit becomes more senile and resolves at the exit of the pus, and often the patient dies, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be very careful with this chapter when performing incisions on these abscesses, as you must remove the pus and consider whether the pus of the abscess is little, or if it is a flat section, then you administer those remedies to him or from an ancient source; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the incision are large, then you must wait until they meet before they merge.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if a part of the tendon is removed from the abscess or has been concaved in that area, then you should cover it with old or new cloth made of fabric, just like when you have treated wounds or rashes, their moisture; and strengthen it within the third day; and then process it and cure it with that which comes from the juices inside until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If you accidentally spill blood during the operation, then you should administer cold water and apply a cloth of linen on those parts where the blood is flowing, and place that cloth over the area of the bleeding wounds.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, then you should administer remedies and cures and powders of those which have been recommended in various places of this our book and of division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near important nerves, then you should cover those parts with powders and oil, and place them over those areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer, and the wounds are fleshy, then you should apply powdered sulfur or vinegar and oil, and all of this should be applied before the third day, as we have said, and then you should remove the abscess and clean that area and administer to it what is appropriate for its healing within the time it takes to become healthy.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses in general, but according to the method of distinction that has already been said, each abscess should be treated differently depending on its specific type.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	About the incision of abscesses that occur in the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	Small abscesses in the neck, and their specific types that contain tunicae that are unique to them; and their specific types are as follows.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And among them are those that are thin, and of those that contain moisture similar to honey.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And among them are those that contain moisture similar to honey and their own kind; and of those that are hard, like stones.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In the section of all, and in the extraction of those, one should not fear, as it does not create a barrier to the extraction of those.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation in the section of those is that you use those instruments in the shape of which it approaches the area, which is called a trocar, as long as you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If that which contains is moisture, then cut that section according to its length through the surface in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section of the line of B up to the line of G. Then, as the moisture is evacuated, you scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, since too many wounds returned, if there is any cause of it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then immerse it in Egyptian cotton, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that area and leave it there for another day, since that water corrodes everything that comes from that layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeat the procedure on the other side, thoroughly and carefully if necessary, until you are confident that there is no cause for that skin; then cure the pain with the same method until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you should insert this second instrument in this way:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a curved shape like a crochet, and insert it between two lips of the instrument and scrape all parts, and use your skill to extract the membrane that contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your instrument causes discomfort, then do what I have told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, perform the operation on the abscess with healing and treatment according to what we have told you; and if you incise an abscess that is filled with pus, it is less painful, because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some people have such abscesses that they are completely dry; the cause is that when you incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and drain it like a deaf stone, rough, white, which cannot be washed, and if anyone touches it, it will cause pain.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other cases, abscesses in the head are not covered in this chapter, as with those that occur on the heads of children and must be explained by the sections of hair, but the section of these all is a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And place your hand over the lowest part of them to prevent the spread of the disease to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And apply that which is appropriate for healing to that of healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofula, which occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses occur in the neck, arms, and legs; and some occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and their causes among them, and all scrofula of these is within its own tunic, and as with the nodular abscess of the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofula are hard, as some are stone-like, and some contain moisture, and those that do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in the place where you have found good disposition in the Touching, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the code, and is maggoty to all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arch, and is not pronged, because you incise that place with a dry superficial part above the part behind the line of .G. within the line of .B., and score that place from all parts, and extend two lips of the code on one side, or on both sides if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that small piece by piece.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more caution that the vein or nerve is not incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And it is not a sharp instrument, which does not adjust to your hand in the incision, or which disturbs the patient, and that you do not incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised the vein or arch and prohibited from your operation, then pause in the place of the vinegar-soaked cloth or other powders that keep the flow of pus, and clean the place, and let that remain inside which stops the increase of the abscess and the skin becomes soft and begins to dry.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the tooth is removed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	So return to your operation before the wound is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire if there is any cause of other small scrofula, so incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the region of the large vein of the scrofula, do not incise that scrofula of its region.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you do that, make sure it is very strong and that it does not harm itself when it falls.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then complete the patch with old cotton that you have already immersed in Egyptian mummia, and then cure that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that scrofula completely, make sure you adjust the two lips of the patch and cause them to stick together as soon as possible so that there is no excess.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess due to the size of the scrofula, make sure you suture the region of that and administer that which is called.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And in the case of scrofula that contains moisture, pierce that surface puncture here where it appears to you at the location of maturation of that, and pause that puncture which is the lowest of that, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the puncture, using needles and similar to those, in order to erode that which is around the corrosion.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see that the wound is already cleaned, then you cure that needle of generated flesh before it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the pus pocket in an accidental abscess through the thigh.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	This section has been done in the groin, and no one has seen anyone do that in our land.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of that speech.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	May the men have an esquinencia, cover that should be avoided during the extraction of the groin, as it is not done well for that reason, because all the veins and major parts of the patient are there.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or two tonsils, when the disease is not in the root, cut off the section of epiglottis to prevent the danger that is done by suffocation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we want that, cut off the epiglottis with three or four small sections of the epiglottis circles, or for the thickness in the area between two circles, that the section is in a cylinder, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for section, which is devoid of flesh and the sinuses of sane from it are open.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is afraid, then extend the tongue of the throat to one side, and then cut the tongue until it reaches the canal, but avoid the sinuses of sane if there is some cause from those.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the larynx according to what we have recommended; and it is indicated over the section of the canal through the flaccidity which is from that and the disruption of the voice and for the abscess of the throat.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Let the wound be left open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the time comes when that puncture is feared, add two strips of the wound's skin, and let it heal alone with the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that prevent the flesh from becoming infected until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the summary of the speech we have recommended is nothing more than to see how some people who have been infected with abscesses have been cured, and the patient has died, and his mouth was sealed, and they cut the epiglottis so that the patient could breathe over the area of the wound for some time, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that reason, leave the wound open until the poison of the patient is consumed; and the poison lasts for three days; and therefore, in that case, commander, leave the wound open, and cure it within the time it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen is that a servant holds a knife and inserts part of the lung's tissue into the patient's mouth, and she was called for its treatment, and then she covered the wound with mud as it does the morbid flesh, and then exposed the wound and covered it with a clean cloth that was not from the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you should confess that there was no incision of the vein or guide of the wound, and the wind was from the wound, and cure it within that fire is healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not harm the servant if he does not return to his former position, and bring him back to his previous arrangements.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now tell you that in the section of the epidural there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of incision over the abscess that occurs in the groin forward, and is called hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called hernia of the groin is an abscess large according to the color of the body, and it is caused by women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one there is no cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one occurs in two ways, one of which is similar to large nodes, and the other way is similar to abscess that is caused by the formation of an artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not make any assumption about it as you would with a sword, except in the case of a small one.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you have a needle and thread, investigate it and see if it resembles a heavy knot, and if it is not suspended by any of the veins, then insert that needle with the knots and extract that which contains the bone and bursa; otherwise, thoroughly examine its entire structure and apply treatment with what you believe to be most effective before it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section of the types of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the types of knots that I have already mentioned all their species in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you should make a distinction between a knot and an opening when making a doubtful decision.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, you should say that an opening is heat and fever and severe pain until the boiling of excess is subdued; and it is a putrid condition that ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	If there is no heat, fever, or pain, and if the patient's pulse is like that of a lion, which is slow, then this is a sign of death.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	If the color of the body is pale, and the beginning of it is like that of a corpse, whether major or minor, and it is one of two kinds, either fat and containing much humidity, or the colors of humidity are mottled, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you reach the cure of the disease, examine that and inquire about that at the beginning of the instrument which is called the introitus, according to what will come out of its form, which is appropriate for this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is necessary to inquire about abscesses and all wounds, and you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid place where you find the abscess, and you turn the tips of it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the cavity.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then place your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and extract the instrument and consider what is inside it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the current moisture is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you insert a dry superficial section as mentioned in the other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is no moisture from the imprint of the insertion, then you know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And if it has a form of crochet according to this shape:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have been taught, suspend that with the hooks, and excoriate the cord from all parts to facilitate, and keep the skin or bag over that and remove that pus from there.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to remove that skin, and then you wait until that happens, and then you remove it from there before any cause comes from it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If it comes from any cause, too much or not enough, then the skin returns according to the most.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that it comes from any part of the skin, then complete the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place over that which seats the abscess cautiously, and cure that from the other cure before it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is necessary to treat a large wound, then take both of its lips and cure that part with that which contains it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If it comes from the opposite side or not, then take and fill the wound with a mixture of vinegar and lemon juice that is boiled for two days or three until the inflammation subsides and the suppuration begins; and then return to incise that which remains.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for incision and puncture.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those that have the forms of probes, and of three kinds, which are large, and theirs are flexible, and theirs are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of a large probe is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of a flexible probe is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of a small probe is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Made of iron, of steel, of the ends that are curved reasonably, so that the instrument does not get stuck in the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experimenters, and they are named Albert, and one of them is called Berthold.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three spices, one of which is great, namely pepper, and another is small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great experimenter, his shape:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the pepper experimenter, his shape:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experimenter, his shape:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is said that they are for those abscesses and ulcers and fistulas and boils, because among them there are bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they make needles, large, lions, as with great golden needles, and they are made of iron, or of gold, or of silver, and the best are when they are made of iron.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made by the experimenters of black pitch, which are said to be useful for those who have fistulas in the cavity of which they are reflective, that they are reflected by their lightness on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of three sizes, that the longest of them is on their longs, and the others on their sides, and the shortest on their chests, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The great experiment of the plum:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The middle experiment of the plum:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The small experiment of the plum:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the nails are of special types, that of those which are simple ones, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and middle.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their nails there is an arch, and it is of three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those which have two curves, they are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of theirs which have three curves, they are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large simple nail, the shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a middle simple nail:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small simple nail, the shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large nail:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a large nail, form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small nail, form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large nail having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a small nail having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small nail having two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large nail having three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small nail having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small nail having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of sharp and pointed scalpels that cut and lance the nodes and abscesses, and there are three kinds, one large, small, and medium.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of a medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The edges of those that are made by cutting are sharp, and the other edges are not sharp, and they are not rested in such a way, but so that they can be used well in the excoriation of nodes to avoid injury to veins or nerves, and for those it is a cure for the patient and also peace of mind due to the drainage of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of amulets, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large amulet:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a medium-sized amulet:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a small amulet:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	These are made of gold and their like, which is made into powder.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is on the outside that it is pricked with a hidden needle and placed between the parts and the skin, as you wish, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatiums, which are placed between the parts for the puncture of abscesses and do not pierce the skin, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of those which are cut off from the flow of blood, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; their forms are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	These are made of gold, round or some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should have these kinds of syringes, large and small, because when you need to remove abscess fluid quickly, it is necessary, and later when there is no medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy areas, such as on the sides of the thighs and cushions, and on the sides of the arms, breasts, belly, and groin, similar to their fleshy areas.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some syringes are made of other small tools similar to lancets, according to this form; by which the pus is removed when it is done by fleamotomy, or you must insert into a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some syringes are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	About the care of men's breasts, which are similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some women inflate their breasts with air to enhance their appearance when they start losing them due to aging, and then remove the inflated breasts, and assemble the breasts of women, and remote ones.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to those who have that, cut those parts in the shape of the crescent moon according to this line from .B. to .G., and then remove all the scabs, and place the flesh-colored medicament on the wound, and adjust the edges of the medicament with a cotton swab, and heal that before it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	However, if the breast declines to the parts below and is softened by its size as it does in women, then cut it into two parts higher up, each part similar to a crescent moon shape, of which each contains the other at the end of each, so that the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line from .B. and .G. And then remove the scab that is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary for healing before it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the initial incision as instructed due to the patient's restlessness or excessive bleeding, then apply a cloth soaked in corrosive liquid to the wound, and leave it inside where the corrosive substance eats away at the gray matter, and then care for the area that needs healing.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the perforation of abscesses that come from the mamilla (nipple).
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from the mamilla are of the species of scrofula, which contain a pus pocket.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And among those that contain moisture, those that contain moisture should be incised according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And as soon as all the content of the abscess is evacuated, then you can close it with a stitch and leave it open for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the wound should be left to heal and treated with an appropriate liquid until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the glands of the neck and of the scrophulas is, then you incise it as we have said in the section on the scrophulas equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague extends to an area that cannot be pricked, then administer it with a cautery according to what we have said in that case.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the incision of abscesses that occur by force or by vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the ribs are broken and the membrane is consolidated over it, then boils and pustules occur because of inflammation and abscess through the artery or vein: because when the abscess occurs by force, it is longer in the front of the body; and that when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a noise in the place where it is.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which occurs by vein is round like a shield on the front of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And incision over this abscess is an error, and especially in that which is behind the shoulders, and in the elbows, and in the collarbone, and in many parts of the body; and it is a great wound, so therefore avoid its cure by iron, and that which is on the outside, or on the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	When over the part that belongs to them due to inflammation of the orifice of the arch, cut through the dry section in the long; and then remove the section with scissors and the arch, and remove the tunics inside where it is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place the needle over that and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the arch with a double force in two places, — which causes you to have an experience in extracting two arches that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then push the location between two ligaments within the space where it is completely in it, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which pus is generated within the space where the ligaments fall; and then cure that with a suitable remedy to it until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is due to a section of a vein, then cover that you have your hand on the location where the abscess is, and then introduce the needle after the location where you have had your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a double thread according to what I have told you in the vein of grape4 of two parts and two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that the thread will come out, then insert the thin needle into the pus at the beginning of the wound, and strengthen the four corners of the thread.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the pus in the middle part of the wound before inserting that which is inside it, and leave what comes out of it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place a poultice over the wound, which you have soaked in water and oil, and then administer the cure that is made from herbs and applied inside until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	When abscesses occur in the arches and veins, and similarly when abscesses occur in the nerves when they are affected by excessive work or similar causes.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is done in the places of the assistants or the ankle, or in any place where there are many joints.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And the abscess is severe, and it is similar to the color of the other body, and it is in the major parts of the limbs, and when it is stretched by violence, it feels in the patient a similar shock.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And there is no abscess attached to the front of the body, and therefore the cord is left, and it is not maggoted at all parts and does not go to the previous or posterior parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be pierced with iron, because it could cause great contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	May the one who is in the head or on the forehead have the cord made of sponge.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If there are few abscesses, then use those at the tips and cut off the ones on the ribs.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then hang it on an hook, and scrape off that one, and remove it; and adjust the bandage to the wound, and cure it before it becomes healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the incision of abscesses that occur in the cheek and those that occur in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	In some people, moles occur in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies of those that are called fungal because they resemble those that function, with a subtle rib and a large head; and their lips are also converted, and it is from those that are small, and it is from those that are very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have also seen one, and in his belly were two thighs that were more similar to functions, and there was no difference between those white ones, of smaller reason.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those were turned inside out and defended themselves, and moisture ran from that time onwards.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I inserted those and again in the one foot eight unciae, and the other five unciae.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation at the insertion of theirs is that you consider if the patient is humid, and the color of the thigh is white, humid, of subtle reason; then you insert it with a flat spatula, and in your presence cauterize it in the fire, because motas veguadas deves la seccio of them is expelled by sanc; and if you vent the sanc, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient purple and afraid, guard yourself from insertion with iron; but then take some recent blood, and strengthen that thigh, the manner of which we have said; and leave that for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust in the narrowing of the lead rope; therefore, do not stop pulling the thick rope until it is cut and falls by itself into its own labor.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	However, if the rope is too thick, there may be some cause for fear and anxiety, especially in one who is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	However, it is possible that you incise the wound of it, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then care for that until it is healed from the plague.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful that you do not incise the rope that is of dark color, of little sensation, and regularly round, for that is cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you will come to remember cancer soon.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 62.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the cure of high abdominal pain.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	High abdominal pain is caused by many causes; or by fissures of the navel which is on the belly, and it is covered with cloth or intestine according to what is appropriate in the other ruptures; or by swelling which flows from a vein or artery according to what is called it, or by constriction of the bowels in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to a rupture of the tendon and inflammation of the skin, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and it is accompanied by severe pain, and appears in different positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its position is different from what we have mentioned before, with greater variation, and when you press it, it disappears, and then returns; and often it is accompanied by severe pain, and it requires a lot of effort to introduce the bath and intense labor.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, then it is not painful and does not disappear when you press your hand on it, nor is it tightened or hardened.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to cancer, then the abscess appears with blackish downward slopes.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is due to a tumor, then the abscess is heavy, large, and hard, and it feels like a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to inflammation, then the touch of it is painful.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on the patient is considered to be if the prominence of the navel is due to a bone, or a vein, or by pressure; then it is prohibited from the cure of the patient, as there is fear and terror in that which you have been taught in the chapter where he mentioned the abscesses by bone and by vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then command the patient to hold their own hand, and be standing extended; and then make an incision around the entire umbilicus, and then command that person who is standing between your hands on the side, and then circle the sponge around the circumference of the umbilicus over the place where you have placed the tent; and then extend the main part of the abscess to the parts above the ankle; and then tie in the circuit the strong or the weak and the method of the knot of the rope.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then suck the pus of the abscess extended on the ligament and introduce the said needle into that place and seek the intestine; and if you have not done so before or guarded it by the ligament, then extract the pus and push the intestine to the parts below the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the cloth, take that one and cut off the excess parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is against your arch or vein, then circle that spot and return to your operation; take two needles and place them in those two points strong, and penetrate two needles into the circuit you made around the abscess, which you make to penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and let the wound heal on its own; or cut away that part which is thinning and seeping, and then cure that area with a remedy that covers the wound before it becomes healthy.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the umbilical opening is filled with flesh or moisture, then cover the abscess as we have said and remove the sanc or moisture, which you find in it, and then cure that area with a remedy that covers and consolidates the wound.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 44
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of the knee.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	As we have said in the previous section, about the knee and how to treat it with medicines, and that it is a good practice in the treatment of the knee so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that the knee generates in the most and careful treatment of the cure of it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancients said that some knee gout can be found in places where it is possible to eradicate it, such as the knee which is in the breasts or in the cushion and similar to the members allocated to stretch all of it, and especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and great, do not try to treat it yourself, because I have not seen anyone who can cure that or any other, nor has it been reached by that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in it is when it is allocated as we have said, that you precede and lay the patient and purge him of black bile some gout, and if it is found, replace it with a clear one.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation, and prohibit them from moving any limbs that could cause harm; and then shave all parts of the body thoroughly without causing any injury to the patient.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not stop it in that manner, and examine the affected areas, and clean the wound thoroughly with your hand or any suitable instrument that is available to you.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	However, if you encounter heavy bleeding from a vein or artery, then cauterize that area as soon as the blood flow has stopped, and then treat the wound with the appropriate method until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 4
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the previous division, the types of dropsy caused by water, and the symptoms of each type, and their treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the one that is cured with iron is only the type of althitas alone, and it is not similar to the type of timpanistres or the type of hypopyon, which is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this kind of hydrocephalic headache with medicines and not caused any harm to the patient, consider whether the patient has recovered from the other illness or if it is another hydrocephalic condition, such as those in the chest or abdomen, and similar to those, then be aware that you should not treat it with a knife, because fear is involved in that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	And if you see that the patient is of good virtue and has no other illness except hydrocephalus alone, and not in a child or an old person, then the method of the operation for this is that you lift the patient between your arms, and place him on his back, pressing the water out of his head at the part behind the occiput, and then take a sponge of this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	should be of two sharp points long, with a sharp tip like a sponge; but it should also be in some small length, so that in the operation you do not pierce into the intestine, and that you do not harm that one.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider whether the generation of dropsy is due to the intestines, because it is often said that you should make an incision along the belly for the length of three fingers above the umbilicus, on the right side of the patient.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of dropsy is due to a bad intestine, then your incision should be on the left side of the belly for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of dropsy is due to a worm, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not let your incision be on the side over which you want to make the patient vomit, so that the excess does not flow into that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce the entire intestine with the instrument, and then insert it into that incision, and lift your hand between the intestine and the siphon, and you excoriate that; and if the quantity of one finger or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the siphon until it reaches the space at the place where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that one and insert an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a silver needle; made of silver or of thin iron wire, which has a small hole in the lower part of it and three holes on each side: two from one side and one from the other side; and it is shaped at its end according to the manner of the plume, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end of it is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, then draw it back over the instrument, and thus drain the water in small quantities, because if you drain too much at once, the patient may die from resolution of their spirit animal, or accidents may occur to them.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Do not drain too much from it according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what means to you the dispositions of the patient, the virtue of their leg, and their goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and remove the water which causes that it is first retained by the cord, which removes the hole that is on top of the cap, which you are told to pierce it according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the instrument on the other side if the patient can tolerate that, and remove a small amount of water, and do that for several days in a row, and guard yourself from error so that it does not come out of the water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you are afraid of the patient, and leave a large amount of water, then cure that one with burial in sand, and moisten it with warm water, and let it rest under the sun for a long time; and cure that one with desiccative medicines until they are healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the mouth and tongue to remove the water, according to what I have told you before.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 5.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the cure of children who are not born with perforated urinary tracts.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes, some children are born from the belly of their mother with the head of their umbilical cord not perforated (or twisted straight or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then cover the wound with a thin cloth of this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And place your hand on the wound and tie it with a thin thread of this form for three days or for four days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	When you want to urinate, remove it; and then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not place the plaster, it is possible that the urine that comes over the area will not clean this covering.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	That of which the wound is straight should be treated with a plaster of this form, as we have said, for three days until it is healed.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	May those in which the wound is not in the correct location, such as those that cause this condition, the one that is not born and the wound is at the end of the penis for which it cannot urinate at the parts below, until the penis raises it to its own hand above; and it is not at the generation, because the sperm cannot reach the greater in the right way, and this is a disease caused by a lack of blood.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of operation in this case is that the patient should be placed on their back, and then the head of the cautery is placed in your left hand with a firm grip, and the tip of the cautery is inserted into the second wound, as if writing with a pen, or not making any cuts, so that the edge of the cautery resembles the edge of the cautery and that the blood flows out of the second wound.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation of bloodletting, four things often go wrong with it; and pause at that point where you are cutting the vein, and cure the wound before it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 66.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the white substance that often occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the penis and corruption and blackness and adherence of the prepuce to the tip of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Four things often occur with this white substance in the penis and its foreskin.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	No-malignant, cover that you suspend an uncial subtle and abscise that part which is entirely covered by those moons; and place it over the submerged part in Egyptian salve; and apply that, cure the wound with the salve until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if it is malignant, of a black color, then cover that you administer a pointed cautery to the beginning and the ratio of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	However, if it is malignant and located on the prepuce of the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the malignancy is ingested by the prepuce and the other part deformed, then cover that you remove the part that is ingested within the beginning until it is consolidated; and now cure that deformation, for when you cure that together with the prepuce, it is not ensured that it will not be trinquate.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And already, accidents have occurred in the genitalia and in the black and curled prepuce, then cover that you conquer all that which has been denigrated and which is intended to be corrupted or which has been corrupted; and apply lines over that apply this ointment, which is made from crushed scordium of milfoil and of thyme and cress.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure that one with the other treatment until it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is a flow of sanctum (holy water), then administer the lunar cautery in this way:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	where the cautery is applied at two positions simultaneously, one at the flow of sanctum and one at the plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the vergua (phallus) is corroded and destroyed completely in the hour, then make sure that you insert a plumbum (lead) needle into the opening of the prepucii (foreskin) so that the patient urinates through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the prepucii (foreskin) to the head of the vergua (phallus) (and this adherence does not occur except in that case where the foreskin is known, and over it circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to plague or abscess) make sure that you excoriate (remove the outer layer of skin) with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the vergua is released from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to design those exquisitely, then cover the area with some cause of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and apply a soft cloth over the foreskin, as when it is thin, it is often perforated by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thin cloth, which is already softened in the wet climate so that it does not adhere to another layer.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then apply a styptic to stop the bleeding until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the cleaning of children and the treatment of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution of continuity as with other plagues: rather, it is of our operation and our will, and those who are truly in children, it is necessary that we assign to that better operation and through that more gentle way, they are lost to salvation.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision on any of the free people, because they did not use it in their laws, but rather we have acquired this through experience, which is the cause why I have observed that the majority of artisans and barbers use circumcision and cleansing with a knife and scissors; and they use a rope for a handle and a hook.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have tried all these methods and have not found better cleansing with scissors, with a rope for a handle, or with a hook, because the foreskin often evades the noose, as it has two layers, and the inner layer is more behind, and it is sometimes necessary to use another handle and cause certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And with cleansing that is done by alphecati, and digital, of which blacksmiths use, the handle of the instrument does not secure the end of the male member, because it often goes into the wound of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation with a hook, the nail often breaks and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the child's penis is short by nature, and not stretched in such a way that it requires circumcision, and I have seen such a case.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Despite the circumcision that is done with scissors and a thread, as I have experienced, because the scissors are of proportional size, for this reason the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; and therefore when you place your hand so proportioned to both sharpnesses, and insert it according to a certain comparison in one time; and it is a compression of the foreskin that contains the figure of the entire penis, to which there is no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the way of the operation is that you make the child lie down mostly if it is one of those who understands a little, that you do not do anything but tie the foreskin to its penis only, and let it enter the other day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make that child happy in all ways that is possible for him to understand.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then position that person between your arms, prepared in advance, and not too close; and hide the forceps in your hand or behind your back, so that the child does not see those or any other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on the child's head and blow into the nostrils, and pull out whatever is blocking the opening of the nose, and remove that which has been added due to congestion.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then apply the indicated finger to the wound, and place a small piece of cotton under it, and then pull out the first thread, and then apply the second thread to the wound and hold it in place with good retention, and insert it between two threads.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then raise the nose slowly and carefully, and examine the child's head; and then gently remove the pus little by little, which is better; and place powder on top of the powder and a cloth in which is spread mugwort oil mixed with honey and rosewater recently boiled; and place that over the wound on the other side; and treat it with treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for surgery, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The outer parts are not sharp and the inner parts are sharp, so that the nail of the thumb does not fit in, and the length of the two blades is equal to the length of two handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in surgery is that too much force is used to pull out the entire or part of the intestine from the beginning.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you should extend that of your hour with your nail to the abscess of the area and insert it with the same equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a needle and insert it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If they have passed three days, and that is inflated behind the abscess, then you should let it out before the abscess bursts, scrape that with facility, and insert it again as you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the tip of the needle, because it will not go to that.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore, cure that person who is suffering from the aforementioned condition with the powders that we have mentioned in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised above the ankle, and the parts underneath are obeyed, then that is not to be done.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And until that person is cured, continue with the treatment we have mentioned.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction formed by a stone or by a congealed mass, or by a tumor or by flesh, and similar to those we have mentioned for the methods of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and the retention of it is caused by a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then have the patient lie on their back with their knees drawn up.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place the feet of that person on their own back and extend their belly from the part below their back, and the patient should tighten their abdominal muscles as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, the neck of the bladder is pressed from behind to expel the stone, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if that liquid is not dissolved, then forcefully apply the instrument we have mentioned, which is called a catheter, of which this is its form: It should be made of silver and shaped like a lion's head, with a thin needle at the end, similar to a palm leaf and a pin, to which a thin needle should be attached at the top.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way to extract the urine from that person is to take the thin needle and fold it and tie it at the exit of the catheter with wool or cotton for good tightness; then insert the ends of the needle into the part behind the catheter, and if there is any excess cause of the wool, do not introduce it into the catheter with force, but gently. Then suck the urine from the catheter at the border and in the album of honey.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And place the patient on a bed of salt, and massage the bladder and the urethra with oil, and use olive oil and honey.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the cushion to facilitate its approach to the root of the urethra; and then bend the urethra upwards towards the navel; and then push the cushion through that; and then push it through until it reaches the bladder, and that is when the patient is ready to urinate, and if this is not done in this order, but in a different one, it can cause injury.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then gradually extend the small thread to the cloth where the urine is flowing.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then remove that and do for the cure of urine, using a cushion, do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved again.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 99.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of bladder catheterization using the same or similar instruments that are appropriate for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or when it is swollen in that area, and you want to drain fluids and medications from there, then this should be done with the instrument called the catheter, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but if it is outside of that area, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that area there are three parts: two on one side, as often.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning there is a cavity, in which that which is infiltrated is located, and the second quantity that opposes it, its addition, until when any cause is drawn from that humidity, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled, that water is drawn out, and when it is expelled long, according to what causes a clamp to be made of naphta in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to create humidity in the bladder, insert the end of the clampedra into the humidity, and draw out that water which is infiltrated in the parts above, where the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the clampedra into the urethra after we have recommended it in the catheter; and then draw out the humidity with that water which is drawn out, where that humidity quickly reaches the bladder, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the delicate christening cross that is used to christen the bladder, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, of which the top part is similar to a small feather, and then the cane is inserted into it.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder of motion, and place it in that moisture which you want to christen in the bladder, and then tie it strongly with a double thread, and boil that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the christening cross into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand over the bladder with that moisture and structure which has already entered the patient's body, where that moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if there is no bladder present, then take a cork and make it into a circle; and perforate it throughout its entire thickness; and then insert a strong thread through those holes, so that it can be turned over; and then attach the circle where it was also attached before, because you are placing it in that moisture which you want to christen with the humidities, and listen and smell.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then approach that one with the instrument and do as you did with the bladder, and express the moisture into your hand when it reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of a stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed the kinds of stones and their cures in the division of medicine, and the difference between stones that form in the kidneys and those that form in the bladder, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the stone in which the operation is performed, and the incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone that forms in the bladder itself is the one that sticks to the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will describe it with a clear and brief explanation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it is said that stones in the bladder mostly appear in children; and the symptoms of which are that the urine that is excreted from the bladder is like water in its thinness, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels pain in their lower abdomen, and it is then drawn out; and at that time, they feel relief.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And this is the healing of children who have reached fourteen years of age; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In young people, it is often mistaken for that which is between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	Of that which the stone is larger and the cure is less clear; And if it is scarce, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we reach the cure of that, cover the beginning of that which is called chrysophanic acid, which removes all the crack in the intestines; for that crack sometimes prevents the entry of the stone due to its investigation.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then press the intestine to its feet and be careful and make it moist with oil so that the stone descends to the opening of the bladder, or that it jumps out from some place.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that incision between your hands prepared, and the hands of the patient should be placed under it, so that the bladder is completely made to slope down to the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then approach that one and all of that one.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the stone in the space, then quickly perform a section on it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you cannot remove the entire stone at once, then rub the tip of your left hand on the affected area, if the patient is a child, or the right hand if they are an adult, and insert it into their rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And then approach the stone that is still inside you.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually push it towards the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that one with your hand, and expel it through the parts of the bladder where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant to extend his right hand over the parts above, and his left hand to remain raised, the one that is under the parts where you made the incision.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a probe with an incised tip of the following shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And split in that which is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle, but towards the left side of the cushion; and let the section be on the stone, and let the cut be in the buttocks, and let a transverse section be made, so that the deformed section may be wide and narrow according to the amount that the stone requires for it, and not more, because the stone will get the stone which is in the buttocks the section, and it is forgotten its defects.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is a stone from which some angles and margins are, so that the examination of it is made difficult by that.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that which is like a lion's claw, round, and made of the same material and difficult examination.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is to that which has angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not forgotten, then forcefully grasp that, or firmly grip it with a decent gesture, the end of which is such as with a file which grasps over the stone, and does not slip from it; or that you insert behind it the subtle instrument of curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot reach that one, then enlarge the wound slightly, and if you want to draw out pus, cut through it strongly with that glassy three-pronged instrument.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you push the marshmellow into the mouth of the bladder, and then incise over it; and then push a little bit more; and similarly do if they are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is customary to incise that great section, which causes one of two things: either he dies or he becomes unable to continue the continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not entirely solid.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	If you do not administer the expulsion of it before it is forgotten, or engineer in the fracture of it with the forceps until it extracts that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with powder of aloe and of dragon's blood, and strengthen that one.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place that cloth soaked in oil or oil-soaked and wet with water, to prevent the abscess from being too dry.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then place the patient on their back on their own pillow, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When those wounds are removed, apply warm water and oil to the area, and cure that with an ointment and an ointment for diabetes until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	However, if in the same place an abscess occurs, it is hard and corrosive, and of that kind, there is also such a thing as when the wound is in the bladder frozen, and because of this, the urine is prohibited (and that is known as the exit of the wound with urine), then enter the tiu said in the wound and extract that wound, because if it causes the bladder to rot and decay.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with warm water, vinegar, and salt, and with an ointment that suits it for the cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover all the spaces between the patient's thighs and adjust the medications placed on the affected area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the urethra, and it is stuck there, and urination is prohibited, then cure that person with this remedy until you reach the section where too many troops are gathered for this treatment; and I have already extracted that, and it is recommended that you take a felut iron perforator of this form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extraction, sharp, stuck in the handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a clean, and place that urethra behind the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the urethra, piercing until the perforator reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then rotate the perforator with your hand in that small stone little by little, and you pierce the hole of it until you make the other side penetrate; because the urine is immediately released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then place your hand on that spot where the stone of the kidney's part is located, which is called the bladder, and is flushed with urine, and the patient is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	However, if this cure is not possible for some reason that prevents you from doing so, then place one faithful person below the stone and another faithful person above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then cut into the stone in that bladder between two incisions.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then remove the membrane and moisten the wound with a salve made in the place.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to place a cloth below the stone, but rather to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other cloth above should not be placed, because when the faithful one removes the cloth from the stone, the wound returns to its place and becomes infected.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that reason, when you have the faithful one above, you must lift the wound to the parts above, or return to your usual complaint and take the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of extracting stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely born.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	However, if you see a stone in one of those, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden by too many manipulations.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman is very strong and gives birth.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman very skilled in discriminating whether the midwife is suitable when she is casted, or has many children.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not have a woman very skilled in this art, mainly the operation is dangerous.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section over the stone in women is longer than the location of the stone, so it is necessary to make an incision, and in that there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	However, if you need to do so, then you should take a very skilled and rare midwife.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	However, if you are not able to find such a midwife, then look for one who is wise and subtle, or present a woman who has been experienced in the matter of women, or a woman who has not left this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then perform that present, and command the patient to do everything you tell them during the examination from the beginning; this is because it is necessary to check if the woman is a virgin, then cover that with your hand and feel for the hymen in her buttocks.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then cut off that, remove that from there, and then command the patient to insert it into that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert that into the patient's vagina and examine the hymen, placing her left hand on the bladder, and compare it with a good comparison.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then cut off that, gradually scraping it from the orifice of the bladder to the parts behind the summit of its virtue until it reaches that at the edge of the wound.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then insert it into that opening at the edge of the wound from any part where it is stopped and in that part, and the patient's hand should not remain on the hymen cut off.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the ray over that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the amount that is known to be the size of the stone that was removed from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	You should know that the types of stones are round: some are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know which type of stone is from there for what you mean about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to remove the stone, adjust in that location for three hours and wait until it is removed, and then return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure to prepare the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you will be helped by those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to remove the stone, and you know that the extraction of the stone is from the groove that is incised, then place powder on that location and loosen those instruments and structure, and do not repeat that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because otherwise the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore, when the sharpness of the bone is reduced to a few days, and the wound heals, then return to your operation before the stone is completely forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision for hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is not other than an accumulation of moisture in the white belly, which is contained in the belly of the testicles, and is called scrotum.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some veins are in the proper pancreas, which nature has prepared in the part of the testicles, before it becomes another organ; and this is the vessel of the testicle between the white belly, which we have said, and this is not other than fat.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakening, which happens to the testicles, so that this matter is poured into them, and some occur due to a blow caused by an impact on the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has various colors, such as the color of it is declining to yellow or to blood red, or gray, or black, or white, and this is what is most.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the symptoms by which one recognizes this aggregation of water: if it is in the white phlegm that we have called, then the abscess gradually declines a little along with the figure of a bird, and appears like a pimple, because of the moisture from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the patient's own skin, then the abscess gradually declines in parts of the body and appears like another bird.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the roots of the teeth and the white phlegm, then it should be removed with a lance.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then extract the color of the moisture from the abscess and compare it with the colors that precede its form; and according to the color that is in the footprints of the entromes, judge what color it is.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when it comes to the treatment of this disease, then order the patient to be bled if it is possible, and sometimes examine the parts of the body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then the patient should be laid on their back on some cause, and place something under their buttocks to support them.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then you should stand on the left side of the patient, and command the assistant to follow on the right side of the patient, who extends their hand to about one span from the groin to the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a wide spatula and cut open the groin from the inner side to about halfway through the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And then make the cut straight and evenly distant from the line that should be on the groin, until it reaches the white point that includes the clitoris.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And then scrape that, and observe, and be careful not to scratch it; and your scraping should be like the one that was scraped by part of the joint that is suspended above and subtly scratched according to the amount possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the clitoris with a wide hole and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between two labia of the section of the unguis, and extend the ligament to the parts above; do not touch the cord that contains the genitals, and incise the ligament in that manner that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And then incise that bone to its entirety or in pieces, and more deeply its subtle part, because if you do not carefully examine the incision of it, it is not secure that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the wound from that part of the cord in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the ligament, return and adjust those two labia of the cord of the genitals with a suture, and care for that as with the other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if the wound is corrupted by another disease, then carefully remove the veins that support it, and extract the wound, and care for that as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	And if the water is added in two parts and equal, then know that those are hernias; so incise that part as you have done in the other equally; and if it is to your sight that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then approach and clean the wound, and enter into the incisions with wool submerged in oil or rose-water; and place another piece of wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil over it, and spread it over two gauzes and a mirror, and cover those with a second cloth that is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then place two cloths and their folds of crimson wool according to this appearance; and make the edges of the wounds with pieces of cotton or moist wool, and attach them to the structure in the buckle of the braces, and one end of the extremity is held between the buttocks, and the second is held at the part of the thigh, and two extremities over two cushions and two other extremities on two angles, and all the structure should be adjusted in the buckle of the braces.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a pointed cautery instead of a cut in the section; and you should take a thin pointed cauterizer and insert it into the groove of the thighs, and ignite it according to what we have recommended before that it be discovered when the white cloud containing water is seen, and then you take the cauterizer in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it resembles Greek lettering.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that abscess with a pointed instrument, and ignite it so that all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the abscess with your fingers, and excoriate it with your fingers, and excoriate it with a fine cautery that is ignited; and incise that second one as much as possible so that you can completely remove it; and guard yourself from the heat so that the fire does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting than the operation of lancing, and better than any other operation of section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if the abscess becomes contrary to you at the time of lancing or at the time of cauterization, or at the time of lancing, then cover that which you cure with what contrariety it causes to you, according to the cure that is appropriate to it.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is afraid, and does not want the second operation because of its horror, then administer lancing according to what I have recommended; and when you are certain that it is necessary, by what we have said about the meanings, that that hernia is dangerous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then, place the patient on some kind of raised platform, and carefully pierce the abscess in the lowest part of their back, near the spine, and stop the puncture according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And make the incision wide enough so that all the water can flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the incision and hold it there, so that the water keeps flowing out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for them until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is resistance to the flow of water at that time, you should not pierce it unless there is a white cloth in the orifice of the wound that causes resistance and prevents the outflow of water, then put a pen or instrument into the wound that can extract the water from the hydrops, the shape of which is preceded; or adjust a small pressure on the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you will know when the water returns, and it is collected in vials or containers; and as it is collected, then pierce it again according to that method, so that the patient can pass their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On incision over fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You should know that in the incision of this hernia, there is a danger of losing important parts; therefore, I see the release of it and being saved from that better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation in that and the signs of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, say that abscesses do not form in the parts where the inguinal glands are located and it is done for various reasons: either due to excessive acute pain, which is directed to the inguinal glands, or due to impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And its color is according to the color of the part, and it does not appear in the pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And very often it is a calcified abscess, of which the color is dark, and it does not feel pain.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is done by the narrowing of the arches, and due to inflammation of those which have already been perceived, or due to inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	When it is caused by inflammation of the arches, it is known as dispersed pus when you feel it between your toes, and it does not matter that it touches.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	When it is made by inflammation of the vein, it is not dispersed from there for any reason of compression on those.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this special one section is made and on the others; and you insert the cord of the testicles, and then place the hook above, and extract that from the white cloud, and remove the suspensory of the vessels, and tie them, and insert the suspensory as you remove all of the parts of the hook.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the hook is already attached to those fleshy parts, then it is possible that you remove the hook and insert that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion for any reason of the white cloud, or between what is between the buttocks, then it is possible that you remove all of that adhesion and insert that round at the beginning.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the birth of meat is in the location of adhesion which is behind, then cover what you insert completely with it, and extract the humor as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then when your operation is completed, fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose oil and wine; and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the cure of hernia that is in the thigh.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The thigh is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a blister due to the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to perform exercise and walking on the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease, fear for that which precedes it is remembered.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, cover what they say operation in that second that made the first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that cover what you do is to place the patient on a raised chair; and then lift the suspensory ligament of the testicles to the parts behind; and then take the cord of the genitals from the thighs which are said to be probated to the wound; and hold those other ministers who you, and extend them with force.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then carefully insert the narrow, sharp blade through the cross section of the veins to expose the veins.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then carefully remove all the parts that we have mentioned in the extraction of the acorn, which are found in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place a double-pointed needle in those places where the accident occurred, and another needle in the back of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then carefully insert those needles in the middle of the section, and extract what has been added by the fetid and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then care for the plague with the cure of other plagues in which you want to generate sanity by causing the veins that are not affected by one of two generations, because it is not bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if the accident occurs to all the testicles, then cover them or cause the testicles to be removed because of that, in order to be deprived of all nutrition by the insertion of the veins, and that they be stored, or that it causes so that they are not favorably affected by those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen from the side of the miracle of the belly, causing the intestines to protrude through any of the intestinal openings.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either from the abdomen or from an incision of it, and these two types of ruptures occur due to various causes: impact, straining, coughing, or lifting a heavy cause, or similar things.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The cause of this is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess that enters the body through the opening of the belly because the abdomen presses on the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The cause of this is when it is due to an incision of the abdomen, where at the beginning pain occurs suddenly and violently; and it is an abscess that differs from the usual one, and it is caused by the intestine, and the cause of this is the parts of the belly.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some cloths are removed from the intestine, and this is called an enterocele hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some cloths are applied to the intestine for moisture, and some cloths are placed in the intestine's wound, and they are held there, and this is considered a great danger for the patient, and some cloths cause pain that is very bad and more so when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this illness, iron is used with fear, because one must avoid contact with it in that place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The method of the operation of that is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine to their hand at the parts of their cavity if they obey your return, and then it should be placed over their collar between your hands, and raise their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then place the cord that is the cord of the testicles above, and insert the cord of the testicles entirely through the long; and then fasten two lips of the section secondly when it is necessary to open the section with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is second to the quantity that you can possibly get from that one, then it should be removed.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape that hair which is located below the scrotum of the testicles, until it is completely removed from every part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then insert your finger into that hole where the testicle is located, in the hole between the white hair, which is below the scrotum, and between the white hair, and remove the adhesion that is in the part behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then pull the scrotum of the testicles to the parts that are deformed, and extend the white hair on its left side, and raise the testicle with the white hair to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend it and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind when the solution is completed.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And then examine your fingers to see if there is any cause of the intestine wrapped in the white hair.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause of it, then place it on the abdomen behind.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle that is thick and made of iron, and insert it into the back of the scrotum, which is the covering of the testicles, and cut through the skin; and then insert the ends of the needle, which emerge from the skin at four fingers' width, and place some cautery on them in the shape of a cross.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the needles with strong linen, and apply some cautery on them so strongly that none of the veins that surround them can penetrate, so as to prevent any cause for postema after this.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another layer of linen second after the first, three fingers away from it; and then leave these two layers on the scrotum, which is the covering of the testicles, the quantity of the greatness of the said, and cut through the entire length in a round shape, and remove it from there.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then carefully insert the knife into the area behind the testicles, sectioning it as we have recommended in that which we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; and apply the bandage that we have recommended (and some white cloth is sometimes cauterized, which we have said to do at the beginning of the process, because some cloths accidentally come off).
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the wound of which we have spoken is delayed, then apply warm water and place it on the wound as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the wound with the other method of healing until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of inflamed hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, no one has been found who has been cured of it by iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that is above; which is that you tie the veins near the section of it with facility, and then dry in the middle location around the abscess, until the veins fall away.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the pain as we have said it should be healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	About the dislocation that is done in the elbows.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there are breaks in the elbows as we have said, and we indicate the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not give any cause for hernias to the groin; and if they do, it is rare; and it returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged, then a cut is made in the groin before they mention the hernia in the groin; and this happens because of the extension of the groin, which is as we have said, causing the groin to be stretched, and it becomes soft, and the location becomes an abscess and indicates.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And its treatment is with a pointed cautery as we have said before.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron in this way: and that the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then the location of the abscess is cut open with a section according to the size of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then pull out the white lint that is placed inside the wound to be revealed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the ray and place it over the prominent part of the lint, and press it against the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then cut the two prominent parts on the end of the lint of the wound, and adjust one of them with stitches to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the lint, and do not incise the wound completely, nor stretch the bowel, nor any other cause that you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure that with the treatment of wounds, and as you incise the fields, clean it and restore the wound within which it is consolidated; because the wound contracts and is not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, as it is more likely to promote healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the wounds of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	When the cord of the testicles is stretched in men, it is softened by the use of warm water, as the flesh that is between them is also softened, and the procedure is repeated as necessary.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is performing the treatment to position the patient in the proper way, and then insert the entire cord over the natural cord; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, cut off the excess of the softened cord in three or four places and then make a suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then insert between the sutures; and cure by treating the other wounds until they are healed and the fever subsides.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but it is allowed to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is that the doctor may know about it when he is asked about its treatment; and the other reason is that we have had the need of castration of other animals for our uses, such as cows, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so it is said that circumcision is performed in two ways: either by tearing or by making a cut and sectioning.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the one that is done by tearing, the method of operation is to make a cut in the animal's tail between the genitals of the patient while they are soft and flexible and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those parts with your hand inside where they are resolved and do not appear from the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In circumcision performed by cutting and sectioning, hold the animal and take the scrotum of the patient's testicles with your hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then lift the suspensory ligaments, and make a cut on each side of the penis where two hollows proceed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then make a cut on those parts that will be excised.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave any cause on those parts of the circumcision, but rather make a thin incision over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of circumcision is better than the one done by tearing, because tearing leaves no cause of the testicles so that the animal desires gout.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then take care of the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of hernias.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hernias in men occur in two ways: one is when it appears where the space between the testicles is located, and the other is between two testicles, where a small amount of intestine protrudes.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some people have urine that is in the space between the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	And in women, it is a special case: the hernia of the vagina over the pubic bone is similar to two testicles of a man, a small amount of the uterus is at the part of the fornix where the penis of a man and two testicles are.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: one from men, one from women, and one special case.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you should insert those fleshy parts adjusted inside so that the opening of that does not occur, and then treat those wounds with the treatment of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second special case of men where they urinate from the prostate, there is no cure or operation in that.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of lentils and meat prominent due to causes of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Strong lentils are adjusted according to natural causes until it is stretched and made legally; and some women are magnified in some women as long as it is spread with them as in men and perceived during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then cover that you have the excess of lentils with your hand or an ounce and insert it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not insert it at the beginning, mainly at the entrance of the vagina, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then cure that with the cure of the plague until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Flesh meat not cooked is meat that has not been cooked in the horrible part of the mother until it fills that, and strongly it is also applied to the parts deformed according to the same way (and for that reason first call that "deformed womb"); therefore cover that you insert it like inserting lentils, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the treatment of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is not perforated, or is slightly small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to an illness that has preceded it, and that is caused by meat not properly cooked or by subtle or rough salt.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused by food in the main part of the body, or in its costal regions, or in the uppermost part of the body, or in the lowest part of the body, and prohibits movement and engorgement and swelling, and strongly prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is caused by regular menstruation, if the obstruction is obvious, then it is propitious; but if it is not obvious, then you should look for it at the vaginal opening or at the vulva.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to rough salt, and it is directed towards the two lips, then you should cut and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And place your hand over the two labia minora, and then press on the indicated spots of the vagina that are most sensitive.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her legs spread, and then extend the two labia with force until the delicate cylinder is broken and the obstruction is removed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it on that spot, and stitch the area with a needle to prevent the area from not being consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the cylinder is large and thick, then sew it with a needle and thread that is wide or from a needle of a milliner's.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is made of flesh, then suspend it with a needle and thread and sew it up.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And apply the medicines that cause the cessation of blood flow from wounds, such as acetic acid, and bloodroot, and iodine, adjusted with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide-bore catheter to prevent the wound from not being consolidated too much.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold that for several days and administer some of it daily.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes certain accidents occur in the major native land of other flesh, and then cover it according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is for abscess crancos, then the abscess crancos that is in the major should not be punctured in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure of emorrhages and of tail and of red blotch that occurs in the belly of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Emorrhages are appreciated from the openings of some veins until it flows continuously; and when these emorrhages are made, they are stopped.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already described in the division the types of those and their symptoms, and to say that there are those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	When the swelling and pain are in the first part of the leg and do not appear to be felt, then no treatment is needed with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those that are on the joints of the leg over which sensation is felt, those are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And cover the wound with a clean cloth and approach the forceps or the sharp knife, and scrape those wounds with the razor.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder those wounds with the flowers of the bark of one of the scissor powders, as with acacia and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then soak the feet in cold water for an hour, and place that wound in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then make that wound in a decoction of sumac and of scraps of millet, and of walnuts, and of similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take ordinary flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice of that on the back of your hand.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the bone is abscised, it is good; otherwise, make two incisions and perform an escharotomy at the milk glands.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and apply it to the wound with the juice of columbine or the juice of arnaca or the juice of garlic, and apply it to the area; then care for the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May the one who is of harsh nature, cover that which you have inserted into that second one as I have said in the text equally.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the perforation of the eye socket in the face.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Special cases of accidental abscesses in the face, such as cancrum oris and lapident apostema and ulcers and adhubelat and erpetromens and fistulas and morroys and raguarrias and thyl and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these diseases and the special cases of those and their symptoms, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And since you will find in this treatise on abscess how to cautiously open the largest of the abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know in what manner the operation is performed with a knife.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp and accompanied by swelling, redness, and fever, and sometimes it increases and if you feel that sensation, then do not perform perforation on it, and cure that which helps to mature it within the time when the severity of the symptoms ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then consider whether you make the patient lie on a bed that has two mattresses; and recline on his side and adjust his feet to the part of the stomach that is closest to the abdomen, and his legs should be expanded, and place your hand on his chest, and hold a cloth to this wound.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should follow the left side and administer the instrument that is inserted into the largest opening, the shape of which will be found in those causes that will be mentioned.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, hold it against the palm of your hand, and ensure that nothing from the instrument enters the palm except for the palm itself and the lead of the instrument.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	However, if the instrument is larger than the palm of your hand, then cover it with powder on the surface of the palm to prevent the instrument from entering entirely into the palm.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And cover the tip of the needle that is on top of the instrument and have the assistant hold the instrument and rotate the tip until it enters the opening of the palm.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the incision is made, and it touches the palm and blood, then cover it with a cloth against the palm of your hand.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then cover the wound with a moistened cloth in olive oil or fresh oil that contains some stiptic; and place a bandage on the section in the palm of your hand.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place a cloth under the largest and over the penis, where the soiled linen was submerged in water in which molds were built.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it should be treated properly within two days with the ointment that is suitable for that.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Some wounds on the thigh and the groin are washed with honey and water, and then with water in which razor or aristolochia longa is boiled, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in the thigh, then be careful not to treat it with iron, having care for that which we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner the fetuses should be treated when they are not in a natural position.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the natural position of the fetus by smelling it, and when you examine the woman with her legs apart and want to smell the air, and on top of that is removed by what is on her head, and the presentation of the fetus, then know that this part is the second natural position, and its presentation is over her own head, and the second hand is hanging or suspended from the belly.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those symptoms, make sure that the patient's belly is gently pressed so that the fetus does not come out too much, as it can cause harm to the fetus and be beneficial for its development.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	If this is another part of the body that is not natural and not usable, as when the fetus is on its feet and the patient's head is in front of the patient's chest, or the patient's hand is on the patient's foot, or the patient's head is on the patient's belly, or the patient's back is on the patient's collarbone, and it resembles the patient's unusable figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary to have a wise and skilled midwife in all these causes, and that she avoid errors and deceptions.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you should show all the figures of those, and what kind of engineering is in those so that it can be understood by that and stand on that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When it is done, it is on its own head due to natural exhaustion, and that is very strong on the woman and is done at that difficult part, and sometimes the power of the fetus has already been weakened, then do that procedure, or what women have for that, and evaporate the water from the fetus with a warm cloth and warm oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the sponge between her legs and tear that second one, or cut it with a knife to remove what is in it of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman until she gives birth.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if she does not give birth, then let the woman be rubbed with a mixture of mustard and fenugreek seeds.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, and the midwife, that she be calm and make her cough to clear her throat; and give her a mouthful of water and a noseful of water for an hour, so that the child will be born soon.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two shoulders of the child are born at the beginning, then let her gradually reduce those to facilitate delivery.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if she does not obey the instrument, then let the woman lie on her back and raise her legs up, and then shake the bed; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the shaking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the muscles are not torn and the wound is bleeding, then insert those and remove the remaining flesh from the body or place it on the chest of the patient with a cloth and remove that equal amount.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the position of the embryo over its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the child lies on its feet, then push those upwards, and gradually turn the child small, and gradually place your hand under it, and gradually extend those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When they are inserted into the thighs, then command that patient to express themselves, and make that extrusion conditioned, because that person may be saved if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if that is not possible, then gradually return the child little by little until you reach the second natural position, because that person will be saved later.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited to do all that we have recommended, then take some mucilage of aloe and dissolved gum, and grind it well in the mortar for good percussion, and apply that to the lower part of the woman's belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that cushion in water, until you reach the hypogastrium.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when those parts behind it are softened, then do the sublimation of mercury and pause that to it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have done the sublimation for an hour, then place that on a plate, and do that to stir it and remove the mouth of it, and lift it from there, and press the lowest part of the belly of it with gentle compression, which makes it soften quickly.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	And place the fetus on its back and its hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus is placed in this form, then gradually engage its smallest fingers; and place the woman's body on its back, and the feet of it down, and those be on the right, and complete its hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And gradually press on its belly, and remove that which is behind the feet of it from the thighs until it is prepared in the lowest part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the patient is not forgotten, then take their feet and move them vigorously, and gradually press that which is on their hypochondriac region until the patient can bear it.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And gradually insert their hands and equalize the patient little by little, and command the woman to express herself until the patient is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Eyssiment of the patient lies laterally with one of their hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	If it is not possible to reduce the intestine, then lift the woman and let that happen.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it cannot go, then perform the jazer on the light, and shake the cushions of the patient vigorously, and administer ointments that you have and recommend for mucous membranes.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the child is born, then perform that sezer on the cecum, and study the reduction of the intestine, and equalize the patient according to its natural figure, and make the woman faint and command her until she is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The swelling of the fetus on the neck, its hands expanded and the surface of the foot is to the side of the greater one.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	So that the midwife holds the hand of the fetus and slowly turns it, and that it is facilitated.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And as it becomes and how much it equals, and then pause over the wound of it with that which we have recommended of oil and of mucilages.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command it to turn its hand slowly, and when you have done that, make that cushion on a chair and command it to be inclined over the right side, and then command it to be comfortable; and make that sternutation conditionally.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The outcome of the prepared fetus on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the second finger of the midwife is inserted in this manner, consider, and then you insert the second finger into the vagina until it is emptied of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you insert that of the umbilicus, so that it is not held and remains.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then apply pressure to the parts where the second rib is located, and ask the woman if she feels any pain, and the man should also be examined in a similar way, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The death of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	It is wise to know that twins are not always born at the same time, and sometimes a few are born three or four months apart, but this is strange and difficult to explain; rather, it is a matter of natural causes, not a sign of life.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, whether they are multiples or not, one by one, and distinguish them within the umbilical cord of each of those, and some pain is felt as if it were a fetus by natural means, and its cause is not clear, as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if it is difficult to determine their cause and they reach the point where we have mentioned about unnatural figures, then you should treat them as we have recommended.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the skilled woman makes that which brings ease and subtlety, and delay, and is ingenious according to all figure according to what is prepared by the engineer to the salvation.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women give birth to one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten, and it is already verified that one woman aborts six, and another all of them, which cause is made by the measurement of the glorious saints.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all that is in the science of the midwife which is very much like that, and therefore she should apply to that which is similar.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus, use what we have said in the division of medicine and do not deface it, and you can safely use operation with the hand, therefore consider whether the woman is of sound virtue and not of any of the accidents by which she is feared for perdition.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	It is customary to place the woman on her back with her head slightly raised and her arms and legs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The assistant holds the patient's arms or lays them on their side in a supine position to prevent the patient's body from extending during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then, you moisten the mouth of the mother with oil and a mixture of garlic, fennel, and seeds of lavender.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then, the midwife places her hand on those oils and mixtures, and then enters her hand into the mother to facilitate the birth of the fetus, and then surrounds the area where the umbilical cord is in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	In such cases: then you consider whether the fetus is prepared to breathe on its own, and then you look for the umbilical cord in the neck of the child, or in the collarbone, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or under the beard, or in the shoulder blades, or in the places suitable for the chest, or in the hypogastrium.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the injury is on his feet, then in the tenth, or in the middle of the sides.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And if he has an ulcer on his hand, place your hand on the curvature of the wound in that location between the patient's fingers, and insert your hand to facilitate and make the ulcer in any of those locations we have mentioned until you reach the cause of the wound.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and hold another finger, or the third if necessary, to keep it equally attached, and not extended too much according to its correct position only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let it be at all parts, so that the wound of the patient is healed as it is done in a tooth for its eradication.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And if there is any part of it that is held, then place and insert those experts and turn them in those parts that are held.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the child is forgotten, then move your fingers to that location where it should be put back; and do so until the whole child is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the limb is leaning towards the other and it is not possible to reduce it by traction, then cover that area with a cloth; and then extract what is inside, and insert it into the joint or into the wound.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And if you do not know what to do in the other limb and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the bone is large, or if it has pierced the traction cord, or if it is too tight at the top, then insert some spicules between the mentioned parts and cut the head and remove the bone, or use an instrument called a "bone saw", the shape of which will be shown in the next chapter.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, if the bone is naturally large: and then insert it into an oven or use forceps to remove the bones.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is exposed and traction is applied to the furcula, then cut through it so that the moisture inside the wound is drained.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated and does not cause obesity, then you should insert the needle as soon as possible according to your ability.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the area of the belly is abscessed or is in the hydropic state, then you should puncture that part which contains the fluid that is in it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the foot is on its side, then the direction of the wound should be towards the mouth of the bottle and not downwards.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the belly and chest are bound, then you should remove the cloth that has been placed on your hand, and then puncture the belly and chest where that fluid is located.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are still and the needle returns to you, then insert your right hand; but if the mouth of the bottle is blocked, then insert your hand into the preon of layre, and cover that with a cloth, and attract that towards the mouth of the bottle, and then insert one or two inches, and attract the fluid into the bottle.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed by an abscess that has occurred to her, then do not disturb it; instead, beforehand, administer an infusion of wet, fat herbs.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply ointments; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the wound is on their side, if possible, it should be pierced: and that which we have said about the living wound should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be incised with a knife, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And do not leave any cause of decay in the wound.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your work, then administer that which we have said about the cure of abscesses that have occurred to the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if blood flows from the wound, then stop it in astringent waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in her belly who was dead, and another woman approached that fire with another plan, and the dead woman's wound was also burned.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to the man after a long time that an abscess formed in his belly; and when it inflamed, fire came out, and he began to shake.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to care for him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed some strong-adhesive plasters on him for certain reasons, and after several days, I removed another bone; and I was very surprised, as there were no bones in his belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So I continued to extract bones from him, and I found in his belly many small bones, which had been there for a long time, and were now only a little wound.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not think it was strange, as in that case there is knowledge and help for that which the skilled craftsman administers for healing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the tools that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vomiting that occurs most frequently:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strength in which the limbs are equalized, with equalization resulting in two vomitings in two extremities of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this vomiting should be more subtle than stricture, and should be made either by an iron or a wooden pipe.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the length of each pipe should be two spans and a half, and the width of each end should be one span; and the length of each pipe is one palm and a little more; and in the middle of the two pipes there are two stoppers of that measure which are already fixed, of which the length is the greatest of one span and a little more, and the width of each is two spans, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two stoppers are inserted into the mouth of the patient so that they can be opened when you turn the two prescribed vomitings.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form that is more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Make a splint of wood or second-class (a type of metal) according to the appearance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	May insert at the end of his two additions as often, and the length of those additions is one span, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the larger one, then you make an incision on the right side of the leg, over the thighs, and place that which is between his legs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then raise your hand with the instrument that is similar to forceps, equally according to the amount you want of the opening of the mouth of the larger one until the midwife makes what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of verticality that the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of impelling that is pushed to the child:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of support that is held against the large head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps at the end, as often, and some grooves are made like this, as often, with a blade that is sharpened and held, which is incised and held.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The form of a small amulet:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of an ounce containing a spike:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of an ounce containing two spikes:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of forceps that has teeth at the end, which can hold the head of the fetus:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The form of a spoon that has two ends, and the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The form of two wide spoons:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercised, and when more they multiply the species of that and are prepared by the artists, it is more convenient for their operation and more necessary for women because of their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not work with those instruments whether they are there or not, because the need for them is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	For extraction of the second tooth:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second tooth is held, command the patient to hold their other hand, and then do this wiggling condition, and strengthen your hand on their mouth and on their nose, and if it is forced and twisted, well.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, you take an oil and pierce a hole in the covering and place it on the herbs burning at the mouth of the mother, with calamint and rough and anet and camomile and scythian and cassia lignea and santauria.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the oil, and place that on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a goose quill in the mouth of the mother, and hold that inside until the vapor comes to the hollow of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then do that steam inhalation as we have said, and the second part is removed quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this treatment is not effective, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of althea, and then insert that into the womb and rub it gently with the second part, and when that has been found, take it out little by little, and if it is attached to the protrusion of the mother, then insert her second hand as we have recommended, and when it has found the second part, pull it out gently so that the mother does not bear the attachment vehemently.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	A bandage should be applied to the chest on both the right and left sides for ease of breathing.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And it should be adjusted to the appropriate amount of traction, so that it will not stick and will not cause adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is covered, we have already recommended the cure with suction and medication of the mouth with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	However, if all the causes that we have recommended are not forgotten, then keep in mind that whatever is necessary from him to the mouth of the mother should be placed on the cushion of the woman, and then christen it with honey and tartaric acid; because that will cause it to dissolve and disappear within a few days.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	However, when it is poured, the bad odor is raised to the head and stomach, and that causes the patient; therefore, make sure that they are administered sub-fumigations and appropriate to that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May ancient doctors already practiced sublimation of natron and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument by which the woman is sublimated must be for retaining menstruation and the secondinea.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of copper or iron.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the narrow end should be placed in the fire and the wide end over the fire, and the sublimation should be done over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold it within that which is consumed by that sublimation and repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the cure of the anus of the uncircumcised child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When newborn children and their anuses are not circumcised, which have been already thinly smeared and anointed.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then cover the midwife who performs that anointing; and if not, perform that anointing through a sharp instrument, and guard that it does not touch the foreskin.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place it over that wool soaked in vinegar and oil; and then cure that anointing within which is softened.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that they might be poisoned, then pause a tube in their mouth to drain their stomach, and remove it when they want to vomit.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if there has been an obstruction of the anus due to the consolidation of a plague or abscess; then cut that consolidation and cure it with the same remedy and plaster that we have mentioned for the cure.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the treatment of fistulas that arise from them.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that arise from the lower part of the abdomen, which are large and numerous, and which occur near the anus or in the space between the legs.
E es una fistula o motas.	And if it is a fistula or not.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And if that congestion is ancient and comes from the moisture of white or thin pus, and some worms penetrate those fistulas.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those worms are known by the fact that they come out and are windy; and some use the patient's excrement for their exit, and many are not of those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas are sometimes widened in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the meat of the penis; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the navel of the buttocks.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that in which is known as a fistula penetrating into the anus and not penetrating, is that you place your finger in the anus, and insert a thin probe of iron or iron in the fistula when it does not have turgidity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is turgidity in that place, then insert that thin probe of lead or horsehair into the fistula until you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all or do not proceed with the probe for any cause of diarrhea, vomiting, or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then treat it accordingly.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the penis, then the significance of that is immediately of urine from that and prohibition of that so that that place be consolidated by medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circulation, then it is considered to be entering here if there is not turbidity in the bone, and causes pain in the circulation of the part; and that from there it often spreads quickly; and that it does not work in that medicine, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating wounds, it is not possible to cure them all, and the cure of those is difficult and depends on the skill of the surgeons upon which it is based.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	If in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing is done with iron according to what I have advised you, and that which has already been tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And if the patient moves his hands between your hands over his chest and raises his legs under him, the cushions should be inclined towards his belly, and then introduce a probe of lead, or of iron if there is turbidity in the wound, until you know where the probe enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient is lying on their back, then enter your hand into their belly.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the tent in your hand has already penetrated, or another thing between your hand and the patient's skin, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, as it is not healing, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, they say that this is healing in some men who are born with it.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine for which we hope for great benefit in this is that you ignite a thin cauterizer according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and introduce that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the belly; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all the adjacent flesh has been cauterized and the wounds resemble a bunch of quills.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then care for those wounds wrapped in a border until they have all healed, and then care for the flesh-generating and consolidating medicines, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, it will not be healed at some time by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the probe enters, and does not penetrate into the tail, which is in the anus, and between that and the probe there is a layer of flesh or skin, and if the fistula is in that area on the surface of the anus, then dry the anus from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if the probe is dry inside the fistula, and if the drying reaches the location where the end of the probe is, and through the probe it is released and catheterized.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Then wash those fistulated flesh parts that are assembled like a pen needle and have no cause of those.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if pus flows between you and your operation when you have entered those flesh parts, then milk that is and the more pus-resistant instrument is to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, because the cauterizing with fire adjusts good doses: it adheres those flesh parts adjusted, and discharges the pus from the exscess of humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then carefully remove the calloused skin wrapped around bones or threes that enter that place where the arm begins, and then carefully remove the hard flesh that generates and solidifies.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines have both astringency and dryness; when it is restored, it is healed and there is no fear of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is extended from there to the surface of the chest, then insert the finger into the anus and explore that place.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you find that the tent is stuck and enters between you and it is velvety or of flesh, and is directed towards penetration, then it is not an operation in that place but a second way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This cause is to be administered in that place in one of three ways: either to cauterize that which we have said; or to dry out that which you can reach the cavity of it for the purpose of being able to enter those things and the proposed cure, and not process any more because of the reason that you do not inscribe the lacerated contents of the wound, and that something happens over the patient and his will; and then carefully remove that which we have said that is very helpful for healing; or to lengthen that velvety and moist that which secures that entry into the anus, as we have said, or with the tent or with another sharp instrument, and to remove those fistulated flesh that are in the section inside the wound where you can perform the crustation; and then exert yourself to restore the entire surface of the section, and if the opening does not consolidate, and remains open in the part of the anus, and is more dangerous for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, the fistula is finished according to this method: when you introduce the tent into the fistula, and it is around the buttocks on the surface of the body and on the edge of the buttocks, then take a perforated extremity, which is like an awl for preparing the wound in this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And introduce it into that folded part of the skin or around those; and then introduce the tent into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates the edge of the buttocks nearby, then you remove the skin from that part where you introduced your finger into the buttocks; and extract the extremity of the skin and adjust both ends, and let it rest for a day or two, and when more of the skin is inserted into the flesh, then cut off those parts which are between the two ends of the skin and which can be removed.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then care for the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifices of the fistula are not penetrating, then make them penetrate, in whatever way you prepare, but make sure it is in the first one, which is not what you do to avoid scarring; and then do so that it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spiral needle used to suture the fistula: its curvature is sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not scar what is not necessary, sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Suturing of hernias where the scar is at the beginning of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hernias are of two kinds, either they are between the buttocks similar to those made of cartilage, or they are like a bag of skin.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those, there are small and large ones, and that the scar comes from those immediately and is one, and its inside, and its outside, and in their extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that have their outside the buttocks follow the few moisture, of which the scar is yellowish or a small one of skin with continuous, and its inside according to the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is inside the belly is to command the patient to lie down and to expel what is inside the belly until the bowels appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you place yourself above the patient's wrists and make an incision along their ribs.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the wrists are not firm enough to hold those at that location due to their moisture and softness, then take those at that location with dry cloth or cotton or a piece of woolen fabric, and remove them from those at that location, and then make an incision along those and sprinkle some ash on the incision, so that they are in the place of a cauterizer; or cauterize those as prescribed in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those at that location with the other cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the wound does not allow for exit, then crucify the patient with a cross in which there is a small bite, and wash it with that water which is in the belly and which allows for better exit when the patient expels.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the swollen parts deform the anus, the cause is usually a fistula, and you should insert those with your nail, or with a needle, and incise those, and then care for them with the ointment we have mentioned before they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And the one who precedes in incision should administer a suture to them according to this method: take a thread wrapped around a needle and insert it into the swollen part, and remove the swelling from the parts above, and make that penetrate with the needle at the edge of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread on the part behind the needle, and horizontally; and stretch the swelling firmly, and tie the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Do this to all of them, and leave one unsutured, so that the excess from that one can drain from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the anus, and place that on the chest and command the patient to breathe.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that space empty until the time when the wound is ready to be treated with some ointment or other treatment until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Moles are often affected by excessive dryness or constriction by nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they do not work well in that medicine, you should cover those with a wet cloth or your finger, holding it above the area to prevent them from solidifying; and then treat those that have already solidified.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And then apply a more violent poultice to the first one that is healed and has been excoriated; and then treat those that are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of almsamir, it is clear.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that almsamir is clear, and not if it does not redden like the color of cloves, and it is made throughout the body and especially in the parts below the feet and the feet, and it is caused by those pains that cause the anemia.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then carefully cut that which is inside the navel, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its location; and then care for that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the second one that precedes in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Warts are a small elevated, rounded, and painful sore on the surface of the skin, and many wounds occur in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And its treatment is that you extend and cut that one, or that you replace it with a new one using a false or real bone.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize that one, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they have already been removed in both directions, and the instrument that I would say is.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Ants are a small or large pustule on the surface of the skin, and when it breaks open, it is full of small wounds in the same way as a bite from an ant, and it is made around the skin.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment is to take a strong needle of iron or of copper, and place it over the ant's nest where it contains the circle of the needle parts; then rotate your hand with the needle inside the circle, and place it on the flesh, and remove the ant from its nest.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do this with a needle of bronze or iron in the following way:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part of the needle above the hole should be thin and blunt, covered with something that the skin does not stick to, and the rotation of which is around the same.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the ant according to what is called in the chapter on cauterization of the head in the book of cauterizations.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are used to give cautery.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some cauterizations are made with silver or copper or bronze or hammered; and some cauterizations are made with those instruments small and large according to those that are used to administer them, because the one that is administered in the treatment of small children is small; and the cauterizations of those who have wounds or sores are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of the cross great and small:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the catheter of him above in which is attached the bag should be wide according to this method; and it should be at the distance where the bag is attached as often.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of which is inserted into the anus, which is entered into the subtlety; and on one side of its two tracks, and on the other side one track, and it should be wide according to the roughness of the rays and the largest a little.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines of the bladder of an animal or of lamb's wool are placed, and its reason is one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced by a track according to this method; and if the space between the tracks is the largest of the above.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then enter those tracks with a strong iron of strong iron, which is of the above fields, or around those; and adjust that bag; and when it is placed in it, it should be straight in the cross between two different strong ones, and then crucify it on that one track: However, the quality of crucifying it on that track is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be scalded according to the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too cold nor too hot.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be turned on their back, and their knees raised up and held in place with a pillow or blanket; and then a hot oil or album of sulfur or fenugreek or similar paste is applied to the anus to facilitate evacuation, and the nurse takes the bag and expresses it until all the contents are emptied from the intestine into the bowel; and then the bag is removed and the patient's knees are lowered to the side.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine does not work, hold it as long as possible; and if sleep comes over the patient for the whole night, it is better to let them rest.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you cleanse the patient in the sick bed with a solution of bowel and the application of the medicine, then repeat the cautery until they are healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are morbid or abscesses in the anus, then the bowel should be thin and sharp, like the needles that children are sewn with.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	He has already said in the division of the treatment of wounds that this is suitable for free people, and he says so with such treatment of those who are not able to use medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, wounds are classified according to what kind of wounds they are and where the wounds occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which wounds are made include sharp objects such as rocks, spears, swords, axes, or similar to those caused by other weapons.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Wounds that occur in the parts of the body such as head wounds, neck wounds, chest wounds, abdominal wounds, or similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And he recommends the treatment of some wounds because they follow that reasoning and rule for other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And he begins with head wounds, which will be remembered in the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	When a headache occurs in the upper part of the head without being a fracture, consider: if it is due to a stone or something similar, and if it has been soaked only briefly and is very painful, and there is a fear of abscess forming, then first perform lumbar puncture, and do not delay; and extract the fluid according to the amount of its virtue, unless some cause prohibits lumbar puncture, especially if the fluid that exists from the pain is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if the lumbar puncture is from the opposite side of the painful part, then keep the patient in a position of recumbency and of nourishment and of thick foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is some cause that prohibits the minimum amount of food, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or fish.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And if there is an abscess forming, place a poultice on the pain, either in olive oil or in a cloth that is stoptic.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are sure of the abscess, then pause over the wound, if it is recent and the pus has not changed in color to the powder that I will recommend to apply soon.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed, then pause over the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or has spaces and similar openings, and the lips of it are not adjusted by stitches, then adjust them according to what I will recommend for their stitching.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound is already separated from the bone and flesh, and it is not retained by stitches but only by a small suspender, then insert it and care for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to eat foods that are greasy: caps and similar things until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if there is decay in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then insert all of that rotten matter and remove it, and care for that matter.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which unclean blood may flow, and it is not cut by medical means, then you should examine the artery, and if you find it uncut, then you should incise it with a sharp instrument or tie it; and if necessity requires that what we have said does not work, then you should cauterize where the unclean blood is flowing.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is likely to be light; however, you should powder them with this powder, which has been mixed with water, so that the air can move them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is as follows: take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of extinguished herbs; mix all these together, and then fill the wound, and bind it tightly with a good bandage, so that it adheres to the wound and coagulates with the unclean blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then bind it tightly with the powder and let it stay there, do not remove it until it is healed, because the medicine cannot be repeated while it is not healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And some people used to do that alone with cauterization, when they were not in your presence or had no knowledge of the dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this medical operation is performed in the great wounds when it is necessary to be placed on those and straightened, and their recent wounds are not altered by air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer, then this powder is not applied to that position, but instead cure those with what we have said, whether you place it on those wounds with a degistius ointment, or you place it on those wounds with a flour of bread mixed with water and honey before bedtime; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if an accident occurs to the broken wound in bone, and it is small, then you extract that with this remedy.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will direct the cure of the broken bones in that which is venomous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the joints of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the pain occurs in the neck, it is not different from other medical cases, and between the pain of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves of the neck are cut or the artery, then if it is nerves, not in that engine but rather avoiding treatment with that which causes strong hemostasis, such as zinc and zegi that is vetriol and similar to their quartz and contracted that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place any cause of all hemostasis over the pain, because the substance of the nerves is fragile and its continuation is in the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that which is cured of false medicines, such as washed with rosewater or not, and thucia when washed with hot water and the others peyras minarantz according to this manner, and found humitz.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the pain is great, then administer sutura, or cut the lips of it, and then cure that with powders before it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the pain extends to the lower part of the leg, then puncture it in the most dependent area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to stop the bleeding.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the spines of the ribs or all have already been cut, and the veins of the collarbone are saved, then adjust the lips of the incision on the edge of the rib cage and do not touch that; equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and strengthen it with a structure that is decent, and leave it for several days until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the pain has already affected the bones, then perforate it; and if there are fragments of bone, remove all that you can from them; and what is not visible to you, leave it until the pain subsides, and let it be separated and the area around it be cleaned.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the pain is recent, then powder it with the powder that was recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if in the pain a fistula is made, then cure it with that which will be remembered to come close to its capital.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the pains of the neck or similar ones that are made between the ribs and are made with a spatula or a spoon or a lance or a similar one.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of a lance or a spoon, and sometimes you see its depth, then consider more if the pain has moisture when the patient breathes; then know that the pain is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth and the pain is recent to its own sinew, then you place powder on it in the first hour, and do not strengthen that so that the sinew is not held in the depth of it and that it returns to the body and that any liquid does not enter the patient, but pause in that attractive spot, and discharge those two veins on that day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the gout does not present itself to you, then place your hand on the orifice of the wound, near the old scar, so that the moisture that is there can drain; and make the patient lie on the wound so that the moisture that is in it can run out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the wound has passed three days or more without causing spasm, trembling of the heart, malice, or other good dispositions of the wound, then you can know that the wound is healing; and then treat it with poultices and other remedies until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the wound is delayed, and it has been opened for a long time, then you can know that it has become a fistula; and therefore treat it with its own remedies.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by a cut of a sharp object or a knife, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or the back, then treat it with water that precedes stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If there has already been an incision on the bone, and you have already cut through it, then twist the plate and cover it to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then leave the wound open to allow the plate to heal, as its extraction is advantageous.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other plates that occur in other members, their healing is beneficial, as we have said before.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plates of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition that occurs in the abdomen is either large, or small, or mixed.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the large ones, some veins or nerves of the belly, so that an incision is made into them and their sutures are done more forcefully and more subtly.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is difficult to do by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult, so if you do not immediately make an incision into their place, as it becomes open and swollen, because the instrument of it is difficult to use.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And the best way to proceed is to move, because in that case the reduction of the hernia is not difficult, as it is in the two special cases mentioned.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You should know that there are four ways to close the belly, but two common ones are suitable for closing wounds on other parts of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other proper sutures connect to other parts of the body, but they are more appropriate for the belly suture.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I advise you to expose and declare each one.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore say that when the wound is small and there is no cause of the hernia in that case, and it is difficult to reduce it, then one of the two ways is: either by patience with the disruption as we have said, or when inflation comes to the hernia due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when that is the case, then cover it with a cloth that you have soaked in warm water alone, or that you have boiled in water with cyperus, spice, and embroidery, and put it on the hernia before the inflation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some vinegars are made in which there is astringency, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which vinegar and honey are mixed, because for that, the instrument of the patient is relieved from much pain.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument of the patient is removed from this cure, then gently separate the disruption with a small sharp instrument that is not broken.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first cure is best when it is properly applied that it does not dry out, and it is not occupied to dry out too quickly or too slowly.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, its shape is as follows:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the instrument is sharp and pointed, and the other part is not sharp, and the tip is thin, but not as thin as a needle, with a slightly blunt end.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the wound is amplified and the intestine comes out, then cover it so that its reduction is according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible on it, because that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is widespread, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then place the patient on their back, and support their hips as high as possible; if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place your hand on their head and support their chest as high as possible.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then place your thumb and index finger quickly in the area where the pain is most intense to separate them.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And similarly, administer this remedy in severe and mild pain.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in mild pain, place the remedy you have prepared between your thumb and index finger, holding the disruption entirely in your hand and adjusting the lips of the wound, and gradually uncover from one to another until the sutura is found.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: first, take an awl, or count out an awl according to the size of the wound; and lay it at the edge of the disruption of the said ring, and strengthen the awl one, or do not put it in the two ends of the thread, but in the two ends of the needle that is behind the thread of the parts inside, until you make it penetrate that part; and you have already added two ends of the thread and two ends of the needle, and made four stitches.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Approach with strong force double the thickness of the needle's circumference, and some stitches in two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by aggregation, and leave the largest of them and insert another needle into that, and hold that also as you would the first needle; and do not cease to do this until the stitches are completed through the entire contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of a medium thickness between coarseness and fineness, because fine needles more easily penetrate the flesh; and thick needles are difficult to pass through the codena, and therefore for that reason they should be of a medium thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And do not let the needle be inserted at both ends of the codena properly, because the flesh should not be penetrated too easily and so that the wound can heal before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they should not be prolonged as stitches so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then insert the tips of the needles so that they do not pierce the patient, and place cotton balls over the sutures from all parts, which held the tips of the needles; and leave them in until you know that the wound has consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of stitches with needles are most suitable for small wounds, because in their suture there is one or two or more needles.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is similar: and you administer the four ends of the gut, two ends of the needle, in a way, with a needle that is thin and thick in proportion to its fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that part of the gut where it started, so that the thread does not pull out from the wound, because the second suture with cloth is made with strong threads.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Pause between each stitch the amount of thick hair of that same limb.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch is for women.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And this stitch was used to sew the wound that occurred in a man's abdomen, which was punctured by a knife, and it was the rupture of the main vein of a palm, and it was located around two palms from the intestine of the lower leg, and it was the rupture in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that after the intestine had been open for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and it was treated and healed; and then I applied that for months, and it was converted into its normal position.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and because of a miracle, fire, which I did not cure that wound, which was in a place where the wound was not burned or any medicine, but I placed over the wound a piece of cloth for two days and frequent baths with melted honey until the fire healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two special types of sutures according to the narrative of Paracelsus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And if you begin with the suture of the neck, and insert the needle from the front to the back.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so that the needle penetrates the neck and the other arm correctly and throughout the entire body, and leave the end of the thread in the place where you inserted the needle; and let the other end of the thread from the front to the back in the other arm.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And so that you have made the first penetration, then make the second penetration in the other end of the arm from the front to the back; and leave the end of the thread on this side, and let the needle penetrate in the other end of the arm from the front to the back.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And let the needle make the penetration in the thread at the place where it makes the penetration in the thread in the end of the arm that is in the part of the body where all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin at this point and cut that which is on the side that is of the kidney in the other side, and extract the needle from the codex that penetrates, and return it to that codex and cover the end of the kidney that is on the other side with the extracted part; and extract the needle from the codex that is on its side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do that again and again, and do that again approaching another one until you have finished all of it according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this stitching method is that you sew with suture threads that cover the skin, so that you sew the kidney one stitch at a time from the side of the end of the codex, and wait until it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second special type of stitching, which is called Gualia, and this is how it should be done for each part and recommended, is that you sew that second semilunar suture at the part where other doctors sew it, so that all parts are matched to its corresponding part at the appropriate place by nature; and apply the end of another part to the other end of it, and this is done according to your recommendation.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you have the needle at the end of the mirror, near your own part, and make it penetrate into that spot, and let two ends of the thread; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from one end to the other of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn those needles, and make each one penetrate from the part of the thread into the spot of the mirror on other sides that are on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suture is better than the common one of the liga, and it is the suture that was previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the word of Gaul.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And moreover, it is said that the abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, so that you insert one in each, and begin with the insertion of the needle that you should use, and make that penetrate into the other side according to the previous sutures of those that join the hearts equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When the disruption occurs in the middle part of the abdomen, it is more difficult to suture than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of the medical practice of plague is the judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you get the recent plague from the same person who has not been quarantined because the air alters it, and you reduce the intestine and remove it and prepare it incorrectly, then place it on the fleshy powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then place it on the alcohol that is present before it hardens and coagulates; and it should be consolidated and mirrored; and cure it as is the cure of the other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicines present, then place it on the first thing that comes to hand, before it starts to rot and change color, and exchange those two vinegars daily, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not need any other medicine in such simple dispositions when the plagues are present.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you are afraid that the plague may spread to the main members, then apply lion's wool soaked in quality oil or rose oil, and place it around the areas where the pain is, and leave it there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, then apply that which is used for that purpose, and if the poison reaches the intestine and is made to penetrate into its cavity, then apply a strong stiptic black tea, and more so if the poison has reached the intestine and is made to penetrate into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you should know that the pus from a large intestine is less harmful than the pus from small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to heal the intestine that is called “gegunu” from all plague, because it has many veins in it, and its size is large, and its nature is similar to that of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If that which proceeds from the wound is clotted blood, and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your right hand, by which you will equalize the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has passed through the wound and is already white or black, then place your hand firmly on the spot that is darkened by it, to prevent blood from flowing out, which contains veins and arteries in the cloth.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then introduce that which is another ligament, and place two extremities of the flesh hanging from the part of the wound on either side of the wound, so that the attraction of it should be from the cavity of the cloth and emission of the wound's blood.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the wounds that occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because they have seen that one who was wounded in his belly by piercing of a lance and the wound was the part direct of the stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula, and eyssic of its management and ventositat.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I continued the cure of him, although he was not yet ready for healing, but I subtly introduced that which cures and consolidates the area.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And when I saw that the area was consolidated, I placed over the patient a poultice to prevent any further harm from occurring in his own belly; and he did not suffer from that harm and remained in his usual positions, eating and drinking, and then he was bathed and exercised in his bed.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And it has been said by many experienced doctors that when a wound occurs in the intestine, and it is small, one should proceed as follows: and you should take large needles; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those needles with the mouth opening over the two lips of the wound; then when you place it on those and strengthen your mouth, cut off the cap of the wound, where it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another needle near the first one, and do not cease to do this until you have done this with all the wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that space and place a cushion under it; and those who are close to the patient should remain outside the intestine until it is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is also possible that the intestine can be pierced with a thin needle instead of a sharp object; and you should take the end of these needles, which is blunt, and place it on the outside of the intestine, wrapped in cloth, and then insert that needle into the wound, and reduce it to the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching is only the second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially in one of the intestines, then it is not possible to sew it up, but only to relieve it, and not heal it completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the treatment of fistulas and abscesses.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You should know that any wound and abscess that becomes inflamed and suppurates, and is then made into an ulcer, and does not consolidate and does not heal completely and constantly bleeds in some part of the body, universally it is called a fistula, and we call it a sinus.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And in truth, a fistula is a hard, white, painless tumor that is located where the bone is usually located; and to remember this, it is called a bone cancer, that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in wet men, the one that gets a lot of sweat; and if the moisture is removed in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some times this moisture is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is thin.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division, as I said about the wounds, that any ulcer that is not healed or is not in the bare flesh is not that but one of these causes: of which one is because of pus under the skin; or because of malice of the ulcer; or because between the ulcer and the lips there is hard flesh that prevents new flesh from forming; or because of moisture in the legs; or because that ulcer itself is rotten and the matter that is at it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inconvenient for its cure; or when corruption catches in the region, and it is pestilence; or because of the nature of the region, as it is difficult to digest diseases in Saragossa, where it is difficult to heal abscesses by nature; or because there are bones, or because there are many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Now that all those causes have been shown, along with their symptoms and their cures in the division of medicine.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And I will show you how to perform the cure for a fistula, which is caused by surgical means.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas can occur in all the parts of the body; among those that come to the great veins, arteries, nerves, spleen, intestine, bladder, or some part of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or some joint composed of muscle and skin; and these are the ones that are closest to the main body parts.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And among these fistulas that follow this method are difficult to cure, do not receive treatment, and require hard work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if the depth of the fistula does not reach these places that were mentioned, and you wait and trust in its cure, and you want to know about it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight, and you follow it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then use a thin probe to investigate it, as the weight of the person's body can alleviate and straighten the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If the fistula is too horrific to be investigated with a probe, it may not be possible to proceed with this method.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then clean the orifices with their respective solutions, as the moisture used to clean one will spread to the others and cause them to rot.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then carefully examine, according to the method that you know how to use, whether there are bones or nerves here, and whether the long fistula or the short one is in its cavity, or if it is a fistula with many openings that is entirely above your strength, your endurance, the patient's pain, and the invention of the pain due to your compression on the area, and similar to the meanings and causes of the accidents to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have found all these causes in standstill, then proceed to treatment with confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near the joint or in the bone, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places that I have mentioned to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry the fistula after it has been opened and remove any pus that is in that filter and rotten flesh, and also remove anything that is born in the orifices of the flesh, or from the gallbladder and similar, and cure that within which it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of long and deep depth, and is straight, then cut it as much as possible in front of you, and remove all the rotten flesh from that; and apply cotton pads soaked in acute medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that to it for some time until the acute medicine has corroded everything that is in the cavity of the fistula of the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with the ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it does not heal by that, then cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be confirmed to you, then inquire about that and seal the second one as we have recommended, unless you prevent any cause of vein or nerve or main member present as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is revealed to you and it is in any corruption or blackness, then remove that which the corruption covers entirely; and cure that with which the flesh within is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and there is no way to do so as before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and then you reveal it again in the second and most precise way, and make the reason for it and its cleansing with a strong fortification, and then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, good; and if not, then know that that corruption is in the depths of the body far away, which has not been achieved, and therefore you cannot enter there except by leaving that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the broken bone is small, or it is possible to pull it out, then use fine forceps that are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if you have the strength to extract all of them, then do so carefully, and do not leave any of them without cause by your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if there is any resistance due to the moisture, and they do not cause fear or mistake at the beginning, then insert those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you do not have the preparation of a bone to replace those bones of your hour, then place that which can harden that area over those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard that it is not consolidated, and strengthen the section that you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	However, if you fear, then place over those ligaments three times in oil, or under the anointing of Egyptian oil, or in any of the ointments, because when they harden those ligaments, and the bones are separated from them by the setting, and the attraction of those is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If there is a large bone like those of the leg or thigh or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the face of it, then rub that resin only behind where that blackness and corruption is, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the area where the corruption reaches, and then cure it while it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend that you use that which has been encountered in a man's thigh for placing a cushion and assistant over your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around the age of thirty, who experienced pain in his thigh, and from the parts that were affected, it was clear that the matter had spread throughout the body where the matter reached the thigh, and that matter was a large abscess, and not an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the doctor extended the flame to that part of the body where the abscess was located, and matter flowed from it, and his cure was paused with the flame close until the bed became fistulated, and then points were made in the sores which all poured out and removed the humidity from the wound.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then all the doctors took care of him for about two years, and not in those ways but in the heart, until he was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And he saw the bed of that person and the matters that flowed from it through those openings, and all the wounds of that man were stable and the color of the wound was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then he inserted the tent into one of those openings and reached the tent to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then he approached and examined all the openings and found that they reached from all parts of the bed.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then he showed and inserted into one of the openings that reached inside where he described a piece of bone, and at the same time he removed that corrupt part, and it was already rotten and corrupted and decayed; and a part of the bed had already penetrated into the intestine.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then apply that which I had discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And then apply that which was not in the bone but rather the corruption that I had removed and applied, which had already been destroyed.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then apply a consolidating medical treatment for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then apply that which I had repeated and discovered again on the bone secondly, and again continued the corruption of the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And then apply that which I had discovered from that corruption, and then applied it to make the cure of it and its restoration, and it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered another way and did not cease to gradually incise the bone particularly, and performed the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I had incised about a palm of it, and that extracted its marrow, and then applied that with medicine, and it was consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	It is not necessary to repeat the operation on the patient and sectioning of the patient except for the disposition of the lady's maid and the scarcity of the patient's tolerance and fear of death, because the accident in all hours is due to excessive evacuation syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Therefore, healing is for the entire cure, and nothing is in place of hard meat; and it is good to arrange the patient in their own body and restore the patient's virtue; and it is conducted in its arrangements and does not do anything against the patient in ambulation or harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	However, if the bone is in place of the body already rotten, then you should proceed with this method: and that you take a strong thread and that thread at the end of that bone, and command that it be stretched; and pause that thread of wool thicker than the first thread; and put it on the flesh that is left after the bone, and extend the outside of it to pull the flesh to the parts left, and you uncover the flesh over the place that you want to sew so that the stitch does not hurt the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Pause the table beside the bones correctly, because when you do that, it is not prohibited to use the saw that does not dry out the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	Cover the sawing over the rotten area gradually, because if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear on its surface, and force the sawing of it another way.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is rotten and not eminent, advance from one continuous part to another, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you remove the flesh from all parts; and place the saw beside, and use the saw of the first part where the corruption is continued until the sawing of the other part is completed.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if the sawing is in the location of the corruption, do it gradually, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, insert into that rotten joint, and saw the bone where the other part continues.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then do not saw in the ratio but rather in a line.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest or foot, it is difficult; however, you should inquire about the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and cut that, and remove it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and let everything be corrected by you, when no contrary wind or nerve comes.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know what are the saws and the serrations to cut these bones, according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and purity of those, and their hardness and rarity; therefore, you should prepare all kinds of instruments suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that that operation means to you on the specialty of the instrument that you need; when you are great in study and long and knowledgeable of the ways of this art, and testimony of the ways of illnesses, then you will have already learned all these things for yourself, what is suitable for each instrument for each illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will find the number of simple instruments that you will use in this chapter, which you will process according to your prohibition, which you will experience on the others.
Forma de serra:	Saw blade.
Forma de autra serra:	Other saw blade.
Forma de autra serra:	Other saw blade.
Forma de autra serra gran:	Large other saw blade.
Forma de ray:	Ruler.
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this ruler should be in the shape of a star-shaped crown, and its points should be in the form of asterisks.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not advisable to use those when the joints are damaged, or if the mouth is very wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Larger razor than the others.
Forma de razori menor:	Smaller razor.
Forma de razori lat:	Broad razor.
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Make the other saw blade in a way that is not too sharp, with a curved edge and a dull point, and the handle of the saw should be made of wood.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it.
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	A form of a razor that has a hollow:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Another form of a thin razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	A form of another curved-ended razor:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	A form of a small razor similar to a needle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	A form of an incisor that can cut through bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Another form of a smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	A form of another incisor that resembles a ray, with its end shaped like a saw, and is used in certain places in the ratio of bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	A form of a ray that is suitable for the ratio of the one that is pierced through bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and has a sharp end.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly covered with a coating that all the causes that we have mentioned about razors and incisors and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the cutting ends of bones and the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The ends can be sharp or due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or when you have cured that corruption by the use of those medicines and the cure does not follow, or sometimes the corruption causes the member to die without any cause, then cover that member within that area where the corruption is, so that the patient may escape from that death or harm that is greater than the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the limb of the one who suffered, it is that the member was made black before it was cooked by fire, or if it was poorly cooked, then bring the blackness inside before the wound enters that member and takes over the whole body; and thus you should begin to treat that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if it is caused by corruption due to certain poisonous causes such as from a scorpion marsh or from viper or from ruta and the like.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or poison is at the end of that limb, then you should insert it and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it enters the body, then you should insert that of the root of the torch, and not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the arm of the torch.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if that fails, then insert the arm into the body at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption passes around the body, then in that case the patient dies; and administering another cause in cure is of no use in treatment.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, when decay has caused the death of the foot, then you insert that into one of the bones.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take the sole of the foot, then you insert the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it is possible to enter the knee, then you insert the thigh into the joint of the knee.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if decay has already reached the knee, then there is no remedy, and you leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of inserting the member or cutting it is that you strengthen the ligament at the part just before the one you want to insert, and strengthen another ligament over the area; and you extend the minister a ligament to the parts behind, and extend another minister's ligament above; and you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments a span wide, and all the flesh is discovered; and it should be inserted or cut.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And that it be covered with cloth of all parts to prevent it from touching the area, and that the patient's injury and pus are properly adjusted and cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If the patient has constant diarrhea while working, then you should cauterize the area consistently, or place some restrictive powders on it; and then return to your medical duties until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place the injured member in a suitable bandage and cure it before it becomes healthy.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I would recommend to you that which happened to a man in his foot, this type of accident that I and you would have recommended, which occurred due to the blacksmith's work being similar to burning from fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurred inside his own foot before it spread throughout the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared for himself more pain than the cure going to the member due to the intensity of it, and the unscathed foot entered into the joint, and was healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that same corruption occurred in the other foot of the patient.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me, and I could not help but reflect on that excess which was placed over the patient's body in medicine, and its purification of the body; and the excess did not reoccur and began to go to the other foot where it first occurred.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he called me to incise the skin of him, and I did not want to do that hoping for the repercussions of that excess, and more than fearing the incision of his skin, which was a matter of life and death.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he was displeased with me, he returned to his land and reached me that that man prepared and incised his skin entirely, and was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narrative except to be helpful in that which heals from this disease, and that it signifies by what is meant and by what is done secondarily.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the treatment of sinuses and the quality of the clyster with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in a carnozed member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and then it is torn and perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the place remains as if it were a vessel, and the code that is over it is like fine cloth, and it does not reach back to corruption, and it does not press on the bone or the nerves or the ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	If the space is prolonged before corruption occurs in any member, it is then called a fistula and not an abscess.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment for it is to insert the entire codena as it is rotated, and more so when it is thinned out and made with cloth, and ensure that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the codena sticks and that the corruption has not been completed due to previous consequences, and there is a hole in the codena, then you cure it with a poultice.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And if you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the breath that comes from it has a fetid odor, then poultice it with an Egyptian medicament which is made of oil and wine and equal parts of honey, and mix them in a vessel, and cover it over the fire until the medicament boils and reaches a certain degree of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; poultice the sinus with that, strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine on it for a number of hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that dirty cloth; and do this for several days until the wound is cleansed and the pus is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Some people are treated with ash water, when this medicine is not present; and you should take the ashes of willows, put them on the water; and then filter that through this cloth and treat that wound with it until you confirm that the wound is healed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water with ashes, then filter that through water and honey mixed in equal parts, and treat that wound with it, because honey has the property of cleansing and moistening, and it helps the wound to heal, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have done this for some days and you confirm that the wound is healed, then treat that wound with water that contains salt.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take some finished diaphanic oil and dissolve that with some rosy oil and vinegar; or you make a clyster of some medicines and oils that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on oils.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the sinus are narrow and do not receive the clyster needle, then gradually widen them with a small iron, pausing in each area covered with Egyptian oil or basilicon until they are widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	Similarly, if the orifices are widened, then add the lips of that suture and leave as much quantity in which the clyster is added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifices of which the intestine passes are raised to the parts above, then dry that in the lowest place that is in it so that the intestine passes through it; because when the intestine is constricted in the sinus, the flesh is generated in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the lowest place that you want, then prepare the member for the preparation in which the intestine passes through it according to what is suitable for you and that there is no cause of the intestine retained.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidative medicines that are placed on the appropriate sinus for the part you want to extend over that on cloth of lime.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a large quantity that it covers all the sinus; and then insert the forceps in the right of the orifice of the sinus, a more ample one than the orifice of the sinus; and then extend over another cloth of lime from the legs according to the quantity of the trough, and place it over that for a long position of the orifice of the sinus so that the secretion of the arm is not obstructed by the large cloth but rather approached to it.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	The one that is over the orifice of the sinus, which remains in the entire hour so that it can be adjusted on the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if what comes from the arm is thick or thin, or digested, or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And if you consider the location of that sinus, if there is pain in it or not, and if it is in the abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	When your medical treatment is prolonged in this way, and you see that the matter that is applied to the orifices of the sinus has adhered, or has acquired adhesion, then you should remove it or replace it on the third day, and when you remove the plaster, then change the dressing and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	However, if the sinus approaches the sensitive space, do not despair of the adhesion of it, because the healing of it will take place, as in some people in which the generation of flesh in the wounds takes a long time, and in those in which the opposite is done.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinus approaches the skin in several days and becomes inflamed, then you know that the sinus will not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is the cause of prolonged treatment, then you adjust in the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their effectiveness, they are dried as soon as they are applied with excess of ointment.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most rear part that is being treated, you should take some animal fat, finely ground and dissolved in warm oil, and place it on the wound as if it were in its original substance, and then comfort that part and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it is done in the same way in that action, when there is no bruise, animal fat, when it is thick and well-cooked, and use it; or take lard and aloe and honey, and grind everything together and powder it over the fire, and then apply that mixture to a cloth and strengthen that on the wound; and apply the same mixture to the part that you have cut into pieces and powder it over a cloth and strengthen that on the wound.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some wounds are treated with the long-lasting and powerful remedy of celestial lily (and it is the celestial lily) and flour of errors and centaury, and use those simple remedies or adjust them, grind those and crush and powder over the animal fat that I recommended; and use that.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the sinew is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in its head, and it may be found in the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then treat it with fistulotomy, as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	For the treatment of nail and toe injuries, and incision of the finger, and sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Nail injuries are abscesses that do not come from the nail of the big toe or foot, and they often occur in other toes, and if they prolong and their treatment is highly valued, it may be a caustic abscess, or it may be corrupted, and if it enters and eats away the surface of the nail, and it often corrupts all of it, and it often spreads its corruption to the bone inside which it has a fetid odor, and the end of the toe is black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have that thing that we mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment, then cut away all the excess that remains from the nail and then cauterize the wound with that cautery, which is helpful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is healed and the nail is healthy, and the additional flesh of the nail has already united with the flesh at the parts where it was torn, and the pain and inflammation have subsided, then place your finger gently near the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and push it inwards, and incise that flesh with a sharp instrument, and pause over it until it has been completely healed; then cure it with ointments that have been used for burns until it is completely healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already entered into the bone, then cut out that bone and remove it, for there is no time when a bone that is corrupted can be healed.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the inflammation and corruption have already entered into that bone, then incise it in one of the joints according to what is remembered of its shape, and cure it within that time until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the nail has been perforated or broken, and there is also severe pain in that area, then at the beginning, you should lance the patient, and quickly cut off the nail at a sharp transverse section above the area, and be careful not to cut into the flesh that is behind the nail, for if you do, you will cause severe pain to the patient, and also cause unnecessary damage to the surrounding flesh; and cure that area with ointments that reduce pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	If the patient is lying on his back, it is not in the custom of many men, but rather the whole body is very hot, and very much in the bones, or very much in the fingers.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And they are not in the position of the joint, or it is the origin of the disease in many people.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	Those who are not in the position of the joints do not have evil, and those who are not in the joints very much are badly affected.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are not fleshy, the section is lighter, and it is that you insert that devil's position at the left side.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	And of those who are not in the position of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore be careful of the suppuration of it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And of those who are not in the position of the devil's joints, you should insert at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then press one of those convenient clamps on that, and cure that while it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	When the body becomes consolidated, as it does with the aforementioned conditions between their thighs, or due to the birth of the child that was not born, or due to the consolidation of plague, or due to burns from fire, or due to similar reasons, then seek a way for that consolidation to return to its natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place a cloth soaked in rose oil between their clothes to prevent them from becoming consolidated too quickly, and separate those, or place a thin layer of plaster between them according to what is found.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly, if the consolidation occurs in the palm of their hand, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and adjust it to the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	At the beginning of vice, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varicose, and their veins are thick and full of melancholic excess that comes out in the members of the body, and the most common place for them is in the abdomen, especially in the abdomen of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you should administer a strong purge of the body to expel some bile, and then draw blood from the patient's great vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	There are two ways to cure their liver: one is to cut it and throw away the black bile, and the other is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of the liver is done in this way: first, boil the leg with water and tail fat until the black bile is thick and can be scraped off the leg. Then place the patient's leg on a table or bench, and dry the vein in one, two, or three sections. Next, raise the black bile to the upper part of the leg, below the knee joint, and let it flow out. This is done until the desired amount of black bile has been extracted, which the patient tolerates well.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then, avoid those foods that cause black bile to generate.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noticed by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of their limbs should be done in this way: if there are motions in the patient's leg, raise it and apply heat to the leg with a hot water bottle until it becomes warm and the veins are exuded; or if exercise is strong, do it before bathing, until the member is softened.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the cord in the direction of the vein for sectioning at the long or back of the leg, or at the bottom of the leg you should give it a drop, or at the bottom of the leg you should give it a pinch.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then cut the cord with scissors and excoriate the vein from all parts until it appears to the sense, and it is necessary to appreciate that which sometimes that rogue declines to black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then when you remove the cord you see that white thread is cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place a cloth under it when it is raised and moved by the cord, and suspend that which is like a lion's claw.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then approach another section close to that section for three times, and then excoriate the cord of the part above the vein where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then lift that and insert it behind the other section of the calf, and then extract it and insert it into the second section where it is on the inside, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do that inside where it is most superior or most outward from all the sections, inside where it is on the inside, and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to extract and lift, then insert a strong double-edged needle and tie it there and extract it, or insert it behind the bone and rotate your hand at every part where it is attached.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And beware that it is not inserted; because if it is broken, it is difficult to lift that motion and it comes out over the patient for that harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when that is all out of the wound, then place your hand over the area of the cloth submerged in vinegar and oiled and not oiled, and heal that where it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the wound is twisted and has turned into a knot, and it does not follow the correct direction as we have said, then you should cut through all parts of the knot and the surrounding tissues, and then suspend it with stitches inside that lift up the entire area.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to pierce the vein and do not place it on that area, which is difficult to elevate by you; use your prudence in that matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision made in the wound:
Forma de unci orp:	The shape of the stitch:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be as sharp as the other stitches or have a sharp tip to avoid piercing the vein; it should be of thick flexibility, like a lion's claw, because if it is too thin, it will pierce the vein due to its thinness; it should have enough thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the leg vein:
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein originates in the thighs, in lowlands as the Ategi in the Arabian land and in the dry and arid lands of little fertility, where there is no herb or abundance.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it often occurs in other parts of the body, such as the back.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the condition of the patient is one of putrefaction, which leaves the wound with venom that enters the body like a snake, worms, and other parasites generating between the wound and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the susceptibility to the occurrence of this condition is due to this vein that occurs in the back, causing severe inflammation; and at the location, it is vesicated; and then the vein is drawn out from the place of that vesication, which seems reasonable.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then, when it appears at the extremity, you should cover it with a plaster made from lead powder of the weight of one drag, and not more than two drag; and leave that and let the lead hang from the back.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so many times when it comes to some cause at the parts deformed, cover that with lead and leave that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the mot is prolonged, then you should insert a part of it and cover it with a Roman bandage; and do not insert that which seems reasonable until it is outside and dry, because if you insert that, it contracts and enters the flesh and causes abscess and pus in the location and ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that the cause of his illness may be treated properly and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from behind him and he remains with no cause in his body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it is inserted into some men who are in their length of up to 20 palms and has already reached me that it is inserted into one of them.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised during the time of his treatment, then introduce the ray into the tract of his body and perforate that long tract through his chest, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the location for several days with medicines; and cure that by the cure of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes causes pain, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to it with orifices, and is inserted from which orifice.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And cure that as we have said in the division and with that which is above mentioned.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	When a wound is made on the skin over the generation of worms, it is called bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is not called bovine illness in any land because the worms that cause it are found in cattle and are called tapeworms, which are not between the intestines and flesh, and they spread throughout the body and downward, and it is shown by the feeling of pain from member to member until the intestines disrupt and come out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of these worms is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, such as those that cause the appearance of snakes and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared for its maliciousness, because when it enters the body and reaches the head, it spreads throughout the brain, and a strong fever ensues, which destroys the brain, and this is how tapeworms are caused.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Therefore, when you want to cure that and extract it, it is not done unless you first feel its appearance and then tightly wrap what is on top of it and what is behind it with linen and strongly bind it, and then dry it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If it is taken from the flesh and not from the bone, then place a pointed cautery over the area where it is located, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you see that it has reached the top of the bone, then apply strong pressure on the upper part of the bone, and place a bandage over it, and extract that; and let the patient use medicines for the evacuation of bad humors, putrid and harmful, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of section for pain in the naval.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is not named in our land naval, and it is pain that occurs in various members, and it is transmitted from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen the second one that I will tell you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	She was called to a sick woman in a village, and she discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after an hour, she saw that inflammation go away as if it were worms moving in this way, but more strangely than if it were live silver when it moves from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then apply pressure to that painful spot and keep it in the muscle, and wait for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then correct the other side of the body until you reach the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then recommend that he turn over completely for his entire body after you saw him; and it is too marvelous of the change in him and the speed of member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I have already seen that method in the middle of the body, but I have also seen some things that make it seem that pain is changed from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see that there with the ribs like in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think that was the case because it was due to the fact that the woman was old, with dry body and exposed veins, and in this appearance there was that change of breath.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this treatment in those who are delicate and have a soft body with constricted veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure them and the patient feels that pain, do not immediately apply the heat as we have said, but strengthen them and then apply heat over that area, and seal it with a cautery.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see the swelling of the body, then cure that with exercise and expel the bad air, and give those foul tablets, serapi tablets, and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From extraction of teeth.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Teeth are diversified according to their species, and according to the locations of the body where they are found, due to their diversity; some have large points, small ones, concave, and deaf ones, which are solid; and some have three angles, and some have tongues; and some have roots.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and feet in which they are found is of two kinds: first, the main members, such as the brain, heart, lung, ribs, intestines, bladder, and similar ones; and when pain occurs in any of these members and appears to you as a sign of death, the cause of which you should recognize appropriately, then avoid extraction of that tooth in those cases where death is more likely to occur, and when you do not see these symptoms, and the tooth is not hidden deep in the member, then extract it and cure the pain.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When the spleen is pierced by a sharp object, passing through the bone and entering the skull, it causes severe symptoms such as scotoma, vertigo, headache, inflammation of the tongue, spasms, and confusion of understanding, followed by vomiting of bile, which is similar in appearance to pollen, and yellowish discharge from the wound, resembling the color of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if you encounter such symptoms, then stop the treatment and extraction of the sharp object from the wound, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the sharp object pierces the heart, it is close to the right breast, and feels like a hard object that has been inserted, not a wound; and the movement of the sharp object resembles the movement of the flesh, and comes from the black plague, and causes coldness in the extremities, trembling, and shortness of breath; and you should know that death is near.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the saffron has placed the lung perfectly in the middle of the chest, and the veins that are close to the neck become swollen, and the patient's color changes, and he breathes heavily with great difficulty, and demands air frequently.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the saffron is placed on the cloth that is on the chest, and the pain is close to the small ribs, and it causes a great violent pain and a loud groan, and does not affect all the members of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the saffron is placed in the stomach, then the patient will have great difficulty swallowing and may vomit undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the saffron is placed in the abdomen and stays there, then the patient may have a tear in the intestine, or the cloth, or the intestine that has been ruptured, and there is no hope of cure by removing the saffron.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the saffron is placed in the bladder, and it obstructs urine, and causes some cause of the parts to be discharged from the body, and it causes great pain on the patient, then you will know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	When other members are like the face, neck, shoulder, back, ribs, spine, wings, and similar to the members, they are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the wound does not find vein or artery and is not poisonous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I would recommend that to you who have seen these wounds, for what it means about this treatment on the cure of the disease.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is, that in a man such a wound occurs in the lacrimal duct of his eye in the nasal bone, and I would extract it from that part, after removing the gray matter of his eyeball, and it heals, and does not harm the eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I would extract another wound from a Jew who had it in his eye in the gray matter of his eyeball, after removing the eyelid, and the wound was already hidden and not achieved by that but a small extension at which adhered to his cheek, and it was a great wound among the sharp wounds of the Turks, with no eyeballs.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And if it is not the case of the gout, and there is no such accident in his own house.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And another sage was extracted from a man named Crestia who was caught in the galley, and was Arabic sage, and it was the one that he had; and then he secretly inserted it into his between two guides, and it was already submerged in the galley of him; and then he cleverly removed it, and he healed Crestia.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And another sage was extracted from a man who was caught in his own belly, and he thought that he would die because of it; and then, after thirty days had passed and there was no change on him due to his conditions, he secretly inserted it into the sage and poured it over him, and he healed him, and no bad accident happened to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And he saw another man in whom a sage was caught on his back, and it had solidified over him, and after seven years the sage was in the middle of the wound.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And he saw a woman in whom a sage was caught in her own belly, and the wound had solidified into her, and it did not change in her conditions over time, and the woman did not suffer any harm in some of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man who had a wound on his face that was healed but still painful, and he moved it, not experiencing much pain, and similar movements to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the wound from the man of the king's prince who was located in his nose and had already declined to the direct part a small one, and the entire wound was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for its treatment within three days of the wound's appearance.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I again examined the wound of the injury very carefully; and then I inquired of that one who was subtle, and he did not feel it; but he felt a prickling sensation behind the nostril, and then I suspected that that prickling was at the end of the wound.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied an ointment in the location that is both attractive and digestive, convinced that this location would help me to find the location of the wound, so that it could heal over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not be concerned about the significant location where the surgeon has achieved that location; and continue to apply the plaster to it for several days, without any accidents; and the wound remains healed during this time, and the patient recovers from the injury in a few days until the surgeon feels ready to remove it.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then apply the acute corrosive medicine to the plaster for several days until it is ready to be removed, and gently pull out the tent, and again carefully remove the tip of the plaster that adheres to the skin.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then adjust the opening of the plaster for that acute medicine until it appears visible to me after four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then, when the plaster has been expanded, and it is possible to insert forceps into it, and continue that, and do not be lazy, you have not ceased to gently and carefully remove it with the help of instruments until one day you can remove it with forceps, according to the shape of those in the end of the chapter, until it is extracted; and then restore the plaster.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and if it is restored, the pain is consolidated, and the patient is healed entirely, and there is no need for any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some parts of this art and their meanings, because I have not mentioned them, as the divisions of this art and their definitions are not understood by narrative or not understood by those who practice it.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled craftsmen know how to compare with few words; and they know what is present and what is absent; and they perform a new operation and use a new instrument when an accident occurs in the external causes of the art.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that the parts are not removed from the members in which they are fixed, but rather by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which they are inserted; or by the opposite part of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is removed by the place in which it is inserted, or the part from which it comes is flesh, and it is attracted and removed.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the instructions of the hour in which the catheter is used, then wait until the urine that collects around it clears, and relieve the attraction of the catheter and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is stuck in the bone and you do not obey the instructions, then leave it for several days and repeat the attraction and moistening in each day, and it will eventually be removed.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey the instructions for several days, then wait until you perforate the circuit of the saw in that bone from all sides with a thin needle until that place is enlarged by the saw, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the saw is stuck in the skull bone and has already passed into one of the brain ventricles, and appears in the patient with those accidents that I have mentioned, then refrain from extracting the saw and leave it for several days until its effect is equalized; because if the saw pierces the cerebrum, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the needle is not fixed in the body of the bone only and does not pass through the periosteum, and the patient has been suffering for many days without any cause of those accidents, then you should examine the attachment of the needle and the patient.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to remove it and does not obey your extraction, then you administer trepanation around the needle as we have recommended, and cure the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the needle is already embedded in the body and is causing pain, then you should inquire about that pain, and if you feel it, then you should apply pressure with appropriate instruments to the attachment of the patient.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot remove it due to the thickness of the skin and the length of the needle, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then you should make an incision on the skin until it is wide enough and possible to extract the needle.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you find the parts that should be held, then you should remove the flesh in which it is embedded from all sides as much as possible; and examine that, if you cannot remove the flesh from the fracture of the ribs and twisting of those until it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the stone from any location where it is, then you use a forceps in your hand and forceps to all parts that enter into that obstruction; and subtly, you apply the subtlety that the stone is not broken and that it is made by your difficult attraction of it and of that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot at that moment, then leave for several days the parts that are in its circuit, and repeatedly apply that which is usually used.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you have contrary flow of blood, then administer that which we have said for cure in its capital.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your skill of incision of vein or nerve, or of cord, and administer ingen in any possible way of the evasion of the stone; and do that with facility and tranquility and delay and firmness as it would be and to your recommendation.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, you make the stone to move against it that the patient is according to the figure by which you should remove the extraction of the stone in it, because it is more useful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If you are unable to do that, then administer what is possible through figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	If the sagittal sutures that are protruding from the opposite part are those that have already been processed by any part of the opposite side, or if they cause goutiness in the extramatal part due to the sensation of the part below the proper cord and sometimes in the eminent part; then you should remove it; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps are taken; and then apply it, as it is made lighter by this.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bone, then you should twist the blade according to the opposite direction before the saw enters the bone, and widen it, and then remove it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for a few days, and then remove it when it can be done.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the saw is in that place, then you should push it against it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the force is lost and you want to administer impulse, then insert it, if it is dull, strike against it so that the concavity of it enters the coil of the saw and then push it against it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the wound is concave, then you should insert that instrument forcefully into it, because the wound is relieved by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the wound is poisoned, then you should try to remove all the flesh in which it is located, if possible, and then treat that wound with appropriate medicine.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is located on the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is near enough for you to touch it with a probe, and if it is possible to cut over it, then cut over it and be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, and remove it, and then cover the wound as soon as possible, and treat that wound until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The shape of forceps used to grasp wounds:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The ends of which are shaped like the beak of an eagle and are made with a saw when they are placed on the wound so that it does not slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And there are special types of forceps made with different sizes, thickness, and length, according to the size of the wound and its depth, and the width of the wound, and its construction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	If the shape of this extremity is concave and painful due to the presence of a foreign body in it, then use the instrument of the scalpel to remove it, and push it out with a blunt instrument.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The shape of this extremity is:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	is such that it can be removed with the instrument in the concave scalpel and pushed out.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of vein tapping.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins that are tapped in phlebotomy, of which there are sixteen in total, are two pulsating veins located at the temples, called alhasisain; two herbs located on both sides of the forehead; and two veins located in the lacrimal glands of two eyes that are called aspicientz; the prepared vein in the middle of the front, and the vein located at the end of the nose; and two veins located at the collarbone; and two veins located on the upper lip; and two veins located on the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are also two veins located behind the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	When the veins that are bled in the arms are visible, there is one called cephalic, which is also known as wild grape; and the people call it "the head vein", and it is deaf, and it is a migratory vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilic vein, and another branch of the cephalic vein; and the people name that one "the vein of the whole body", and the basilic is the vein that is palpated in the domestic groin, and it is called "citillar", and the common people call that one "the stomach vein"; and the median cubital, and it is palpated over the elbow, and it is the vein that is bled in the foot, and it is the vein that appears on the sole for apparent manifestation; and the basilic, and it is the vein that is between the auricular and the smallest ear, and it is in the two grooves.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the thigh there are three veins; one of those is that it is placed behind the curve of the wild grape; and the second is the saphenous, and its location is behind the domestic groin; and the sciatic vein, and its location is behind the wild grape groin; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The swelling of the veins that are close to the ankles is due to ancient catarrhs, emigrations, and saffron and ulcerous headaches.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of that is as follows: it is to wash the patient's head, and to wet the patient's head in the occipital region where the veins are close together with a wide cloth and good friction; then strengthen the patient by placing a band around their neck where the two veins appear and the places of their ears are close to the ankles; and if you feel pain in those places, here is what you should do.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the cutaneous lancet, and it is the one that incises, and you introduce it behind the vein in the groove where the fleambottle comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then lift your hand with the vein and the groove above and incise the vein at the incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be the thickness of two fingers or around that amount; and make it as deep as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then apply strong powders and leave them inside to be healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And previously, at the beginning of the book, they indicated the location and the cautery for those.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The veins and arteries that are near the temples, which are called the vein of the phlebotomy, are ancient and evil and overused and cause sharp and sudden outpours of blood to the head.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomy for those is as follows: tighten the patient's neck with a cloth so that the veins appear at the sensation, manifest and demonstrate their pulses to you, and then you will know.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you lift the cloth above the vein at the parts indicated by you, and insert the phlebotomy needle underneath, and raise the vein with it; and do as you did in other veins; and let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the patient's bandage, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, and then place powders and strong medicine on that with great constriction, and leave them inside to be healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And before the remembrance of them, and of those who have preceded them, and their attachment to the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the lancing of the vein in the forehead is approached by lancing the cephalic vein to the ancient maladies of the face, and to emigranea and ulcerous and fetid ones.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of lancing this vein is that which I have recommended to you; so it is that the patient should strengthen their neck with a pillow on which they can rest their head; and then take the instrument, which is called the fossor, of which this is the form of it:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	And place the pointed part of the fossor on that vein and strike it with a hammer or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood run according to the quantity that you want; and then remove the puncture from the patient and strengthen it in that place where it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some people use the lancet laterally, however it is not recommended that the lancet should have a sharp extremity as with the other lancets, before the flat side, and lance that one according to the transverse, which is propitious and strong to break in the lancet when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The inflammation of the two veins that are near the lacrimal glands of both eyes due to a wound in the eye and swelling in the eyes, and on the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the lancet is that the patient holds their head still with a bandage, and then you use the lancet on those areas, and you should be standing over the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	The lancet should be used across the width of a small amount of skin, where there is no flesh; and if the lancet is sharp, it will easily cut through the skin.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply pressure to the wound as much as necessary, and place your hand over those areas, and hold them tightly for a while, and then remove them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The lancet for the nose vein is recommended for acute fever and strong sweating, and for face swelling and headache that occur on the face, and especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the lancet for that is that the patient holds their head still and places their right hand on your left hand, and takes the sharp lancet and inserts it into the upper part of the nose, straight down, where the vein does not appear to the touch, and where the wound begins to bleed soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	When you have finished massaging the patient's foot little by little and applying the second remedy according to your need; then apply that to a cloth, which is then restored to its place.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The juice of the foot massage of the rosemary plant is used for the contraction of ale and the beginning of leprosy and other diseases and infections and malignant ulcers that are also found with herpeticum.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of the foot massage of those is that the patient should hold each one in their own collar; and the artist is on the head of the patient, and the patient is lying on a bed.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then apply the foot massage to the long vein along the vein little by little; and then extract remedies of warm water according to the appropriate quantity or as needed; and then do the same with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then remove the collar and tighten the two veins with a ligature to prevent the patient from being poisoned, and leave it inside until the pain is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the swelling of the abscess of the veins, like small apostemas and pustulas of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the abscess of those is that it causes the patient to turn their head to one side, and strengthen the neck of it with a band, and then rotate the lips of it and look at two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the indication of each is by the blackness of each of those, and that is more so in the circle of those small black veins; and then incise each from the beginning.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is doubt about it, and you do not know what it is among those, then you should incise the largest of those and the most obvious pus from those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary to incise the two veins that are located on the side of the thigh.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	It is also customary to use the lingual tonsil as a prefocus for the central vein that is located in the thigh, for the patient's mouth, and for other mouth conditions.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of using the lingual tonsil is that it follows the patient's mouth between your hands, raises their tongue, and observes from behind the tongue, one side of the vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform the lingual tonsil on each; and be careful not to touch your hand with the lingual tonsil after that, because behind those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are lingual tonsilled in the body are located in all men, and the lingual tonsil is made according to two methods, either they put a small, declining olive or mirtilat; or they cut the lingual tonsil with a sharp knife, and apply it to the wound, and this is the form of that:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this illness is called section according to the specifics of those who are more attuned to the size of the veins and their structure.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of bleeding for a headache:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	and according to the specifics of those who have more experience in opening the concave veins full of thick blood, and to those that contain thin bloody bubbles.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of bleeding for an oil-based headache:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bleeding is of lesser extent and more subtle end, and it is suitable for the bleeding of thin veins that contain thin lemon juice.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The main vein of the bleeding is the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: it extracts the blood from the patient's body and chest, and also from the abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is suitable for the bleeding therapist, when bleeding in that way, to keep away from that and be cautious in that, where there is an artery, and if he err and adjust in the puncture of the bleeding, he will cut that artery and cause blood flow, so that he does not bleed from that with bleeding, before slicing as with the illness.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear manifestly, then let it go and move to the other one, or surround some of its roots; or use leeches in place of it, as it is manifest; and apply it as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	And if you want to use leeches on the arm that you are treating, then let the structure of the arm that you are touching enter into the area between the elbow and the shoulder, and place your hand over it; and then bend the arm and apply the leech as we have said; and be careful not to percuss the area where the artery is.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, with strength, the limb swelling in the area where you have placed your hand, then that swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flowing in the leech as if from the ear of a child, and the blood is thin and watery, then know that it is from the blood of the artery; and then cover and place your hand over that area for a long time; and then remove your hand, and if the blood is abscinded, because veins are also abscinded, then strengthen the arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And guard the patient's head with a pillow, and be careful not to move them until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	However, if the bone is not removed, and there is no medicine available at that time, then you insert the artery, as it appears to you; because the end of the bone is contracted, and the bone is removed; or you take a forceps and open that, and place one hand on top of it and strengthen it over the location of the vein and the skin and flesh inside.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the bone is removed, then it is good; and if not, then cure that from the location of the powders that are used to remove bones.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the removal of the bone from that location is difficult due to the small space and the possibility of the skin of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	However, if the dark vein is used, the trocar is very useful for removing the bone from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of a basilar and cephalic branch, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And approach the person who is most afraid of the phlebotomy of that one, because it is near a nerve; and then adjust the needle in the phlebotomy and touch the nerve, it will cause great pain to that one, and it is difficult to heal them, and fortunately not all are cured, And this nerve is visible to sensation; and if it is hidden from others and is subtle and not shown, then approach that one who has performed the phlebotomy with a sharp knife, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then puncture the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The drawback of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws the blood from the head and compares to the maladies of the hands.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And approach this properly, if you want the phlebotomy to be performed with an olive oil or a moss; because it is the safest of all veins, because it is not near the artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	May it please you to remember that the lancet you keep should only prick the cap of the elbow, not the joint itself, and circle around the area closer to the bone, and not touch it, unless it is at the first percussion, which is above the elbow some weeks.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	When pus is present in the armpit of men, if it is not lanced in the first percussion, then do not touch that pus.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the lancet from that and its accidents should be considered in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of those is the one you know that lancet is not administered except for the preservation of health and hope of it and caution against the onset of diseases, and that it should be made lancet in one of the veins that are in the code, such as cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and that it should be made lancet at the beginning of primaveyra, after breakfast in primaviera and autumn, and in winter at mealtime, when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And a fleam operation should be performed, and the third day after the first one that has passed three hours after midnight.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	When the bloodletting is administered, more when it is convenient and necessary for that person, at all times and in every moment.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is covenanted that no one should be bled before the age of fourteen, and women who are pregnant should not be bled except in the fourth month until the seventh, and the old ones who have passed sixty years should not be bled.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wants to be bled for any reason, it is covenanted that their intestines should be emptied of their contents before the bloodletting with a lion's claw, so that the veins do not spill superfluous blood during the bloodletting of the intestines, which are pure, and do not harm the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And those who are not bled should not be bled for any reason, nor those who have just escaped from illness or drunkenness until they have recovered from it, nor those with hydropsy, and more that bloodletting should be feared in colic passion and vomit, and in stomach, and in multiplication of gout and work and exercise of breakfasts or vigils and in all cause that dissolves the virtue, whether corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And then consider the evacuation of humors that cause this condition, if the abdomen is large, with food and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then enter into the bath and if any cause does not prohibit, or is exercised by some exercise so that the abdomen is evacuated.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And place the feeding tube in his chest, around the hour of noon, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And that the chest of that person be kept in that day from all animal misfortunes, as we have said, including anguish, irritation, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as labor and excessive pain, such as fatigue and similar afflictions to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And to his seat, make present the causes in the use of which it is customary for men to have aromaticity and odor, and baths and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the feeding tube on a cushion that is put or that of that one who should be fed.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then remove his arm, and scratch it with a sharp knife or three times; and then stretch the skin and wrap those three scratches with a bandage.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the structure is cold, when it is not equal, or the structure is superfluous, then prevent the discharge of pus; or if it is a softening, then prevent the body from sweating completely.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then remove the structure, so that the one who should be scratched scratches his hands together between his fingers where the veins are inflamed, and declare it to the feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then give the scratcher some old oil properly; and place your hand on the side of the vein, where the incision is to be made, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is set aside because of the veins that are there at the time of the incision, and those that are full of blood when you place the scratcher over that, it contracts the scratcher, and if it does not contract, then it is tight.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for that reason, the phlebotomist should be stopped and concerned with all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then remove the phlebotomist, but if the vein is punctured in a crooked way, then it is; and if not, you repeat that other crooked place nearby that location for a short time, or above the patient's wound, if the location is not infected.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is infected, or the patient becomes feverish, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the wound, because that would cause more pus to form, nor would it enter into the body.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if needed.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the puncture is small and corrodes slightly, and you fear that it will not be enough to draw the required amount of blood, then you repeat the phlebotomy in that area again, with straight alignment and adjust the wound for a short time, and do that until the location is infected, because the location becomes infected in some people due to small punctures.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	If you have already placed a cushion on them, do not move it, because there is no cause for you to do so; and place your hand on a certain part of the bed, which would be suitable for the body of the patient.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better in this place than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, apply oil in all phlebotomy, which is the act of opening veins to let out blood from the body of the patient, and do so with a Tyrian alfadoc and sagzenea when placed on the one side of the patient, as the sanc is subtilized and revolved when it is full.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, which is caused by vegetable accidents, and especially that one which has not been bled but only the vegetable, or in the puncture of the vein a little, and then you cover it, and place on the spot a sponge infused in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen it with it for an hour, as it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And cover that which is done with a bandage from the incision of that vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is any blackness or greenness in that place, do not note it; and if you wish, place over it some cause of allurement and of magic dissolved, or some cause of succulent menthol or calamint or a similar substance to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And move the swollen parts and elevations of the abdomen with blistering from the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And place your hand on that, and if you later use soft compression on that, then that elevation is bad and bad; and therefore be careful to place over it some cause of the above, which will greatly flow from the incised vein.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply an astringent to that, so that the place is hardened, and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And cover that which is drawn from the incision with all men according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color that remains on the incision after it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the bone is black, then leave it inside until it becomes rotten; and similarly, if you see it swollen, then leave it inside until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, then wait until its sharpness is dulled.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if the person is tall and strong and needs an extraction of bone in a difficult case, then amplify the trocar of the vein and the trochar should be left.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in the case of a weak person, do the opposite of that, and if it is extracted in difficult cases, then it should be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best thing that is administered in trocar of vein is that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of trocar of vein saves from bone flow and nerve injury, and it is more praised and safer than the second method by latitude and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in the case where syncope occurs during trocar of vein, and you should care for that person after the trocar of vein with a small amount of infusion in the form of milk or simple oximel; and extract it from the bone in three or four difficult cases.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is a complication of the complexity, then take the fumigation bath to inhale essence of myrrh or essence of honey aromatized with such spices as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or with an aromatized and fragrant essence.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If the fumigation bath causes sincopi and its cause is the lack of one sanc, then take inhale water of meat and an aromatized fragrant essence; use aromatic oil, and let it be poured on the patient's chest.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of sincopi for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to move his arm and dissolve his second sin, then take the fumigation bath, which is for great evacuation, and its virtue is free, which evacuates the sin little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	When someone wants to perform surgery on their arm, and the second joint is bent, and the chest is strong, then do that approach around 7 or 9 hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	When someone wants to draw the second joint of their arm against the opposite side where they lean, it should be done on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When that arm in which the second joint is already scarred and inflamed, and causes fever, it should be bent in a splint, and supported with a large amount of bandaging, and the opening for phlebotomy should be amplified until the syncope occurs, so that all conditions for phlebotomy are preserved; and your hand should be placed on the thigh of that arm, to prevent death from syncope, which is caused by ignorance and negligence of the phlebotomist.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not do it when you want to straighten the arm and remove the second splint, as the opening of the vein has already been closed and it is difficult to remove from the joint, which would be done with too much force and would cause damage.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	When performing a bloodletting procedure, one should use a lancet that is sharp enough to pierce the skin; or pause on a piece of tyreacan alfarsch, or sawdust, and compress it firmly into the wound to prevent bleeding.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is inflamed, leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If you need to evacuate the blood again and there is no excuse, then draw it from another vein in the other arm.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "funis del bras" is bled from the popliteal or basilic veins, when they are not obstructed or occluded, which are composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the bloodletting from that vein is that the patient should immerse their hand in warm water until the vein becomes visible.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then apply pressure over that area with a firm bandage; and perform bloodletting following the transverse direction, not horizontally or lengthwise.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And your incision should be wide and your forceps should be sharp, which you use to grasp the joint above the knee.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if it is prohibited to let the blood flow, then you will elevate the limb in the air and allow the blood to run into the water until you achieve your purpose.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you will be excused from elevating the limb in the air, and the same applies to placing the body of the patient in cold water during the summer.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the forceps for this vein are safer than all other veins, because it does not have any pulsating blood or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the forceps for the ankle of the leg are similar to those used in childbirth.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of these forceps is that you should strengthen the limb with a bandage or with your hand, rather than elevating it in the air, until the vein is inflamed and has been demonstrated to be successful; then use transverse forceps; and if you insert them, it will not cause any harm.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And do not let your hand remain on the fleshbotomy, which would separate the nerves of those dissected parts from their carnage.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then repeat the hand in the back and let the blood flow into that, because if you do not repeat it there, the blood will clot in the orifice of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And as the blood is extracted according to the amount needed, then you place your hand on the vein oil and salt, so that it does not solidify constantly; similarly, cover what you do in all straight lines.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The juice of the fleshbotomy from that of the hand on the right side is that it is compared to the evils of the melon.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	Do the same in the fleshbotomy of it as you did in the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The juice of the vein sephena from the fleshbotomy is to the evils that are in the part below the waist, such as its evils of the mother, and retention of menstruation, and the evils of ronhs and ulcers of thighs and abdomens, and their similarities to the evils.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the fleam used on him is that the patient puts his own foot in hot water and makes pressure on that friction where the blood appears; and he ties over the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the location of the vein he takes out from the same spot, and from there its branches spread on the surface of the foot like ramifications.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then use the widest branch or behind the cushion to tie the bandage; it is better and more healthy.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you use the fleam on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are located above the surface of the foot, and place your fleam as if you wanted to insert it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the fleam be silent.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the discharge of pus is prohibited; then you should wash his foot in hot water and let the pus flow out through that place where it can be drained.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the fleam is in the first vein, then wash it with a small amount of water; the location is healthy; and do not fear him, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, make a cushion for the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic vein, the location where we have said it is, place it behind the calf of the posterior thigh muscle.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the juice from the popliteal fossa of it is pain in the hip when it is burned with cauterization.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the popliteal fossa of it is that the patient lies down, and quickly and strongly presses the cushion of it from the side of the hip entering under the calf above four digits, a long subtle bend, which does not appear otherwise.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you popliteal fossa that second each time that is to your possible and second the transverse, and it is better; or insert that at the beginning or remove that at the end, because the location of it is salt.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in some men not ameliorated; and if you press that, and it does not appear at the feeling of all, then popliteal fossa some part of it, and that which appears in the back of the foot on the said auricular and annular.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow out in the amount you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then remove the stricture and place your hand over the area of the lithotomy incision to strengthen the area, which is usually healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of the symptoms and qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Symptoms are of the heart, or of the brain, or of the veins.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And symptoms are made in two ways: one is by incision and extraction of blood, and the other is by incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this symptom that is by incision is made in two ways, either by fire or by fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the symptoms that are administered by incision and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body, of which the first part where symptoms are placed is the nape, and the last part is the back; and the middle part is two parts of the collarbone; and symptoms of the jaw below the mouth; and symptoms of two spoons; and symptoms of a hostler, and is above the foot; and symptoms of two forks, and are of two bones; and symptoms of two cavities; and symptoms of two cushions.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And do not extract the pus from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason, do not cauterize them with fire or heat of any kind, nor cover the wound with anything until the entire body has been completely drained.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If it is necessary to drain the pus due to illness or continuously, administer it at every hour during the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle of the day and at some time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	This is due to the fact that in men, pus multiplies within them until the indication for its extraction by drainage and atrophy in their own head and skin; and of those who have atrophy and inflammation in their face and on their head, and in their neck; and of those who have pruritus in their face and on their forehead, darkness and dullness in their eyes; and of those whose location of their drainage is affected; and of those whose taste is multiplied; and of those who have a taste of pus in their mouth, or their tongue is swollen and filled with pus; and of those whose sleep is multiplied, and of those who have pus in their sleep, inflammation and plagues and other causes similar to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it happens in any of those cases, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth finger of the hand, then command a blister to be made as soon as possible after two or three hours have passed since the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And it is important to note that the blister should be applied to the nape of the neck because when it confers gravity to the head and adheres to the hair, it is more effective in evacuating all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this blister is at the location of the lumbar puncture of the cerebral spinal fluid.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not recommended to use that one which is of complex fragility, or in which there is a catarrh, because it gives great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that reason, it is not recommended to use those which are old, and in the lids of which there are injuries.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	Moreover, it is recommended that the one who makes the blister should place his hand on the parts behind it to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	When the alchemical vapor is in the place of fleam opening of the dark vein and the basilica: and for that, it confers asthma, and contraction of the lungs, and the scissure of the instrument of the lung, and coughing, and repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And if the alchemical vapor is inhaled in a small amount, if it is paused behind, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the alchemical vapor of alhagdahan confers accidental pains in the head and in the teeth, and emaciation, and pre-focus, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of fleam opening of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And if you command the vaporizer that he does not press his hand during the incision so that it does not pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the vapor of alcohol confers alcola in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar to those of the maladies that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of fleam opening of the herb that is in the upper lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the cloth that is made on the two spoons be placed on the cap, which is made for the replenishment of warmth.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the cloth of the two parts taken from the forks is placed heavily on the flap of three veins, which is called the basilica, fusca, and cephalica, because it attracts all those small veins that are in the flesh, and those smaller veins from the other larger veins until it reaches the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the blower not to proceed too much in incision, because the area is exposed to flesh, and leaves its nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And there is a cloth that is blown on the buttocks and placed on the hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers that have been left.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And cover that you command the blower to be a large cloth, and of linen, because the area needs strong drying; and it is covered with thin blown cloths and is incised in incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	When the bed is filled with soft materials to relieve pressure on the entire body, it helps alleviate old pains of the ribs and spine, and bladder; it also helps with constipation and diarrhea; and it is used in place of a flebotomy for two hours, and after meals, and for two hours.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, this method weakens the entire body and causes hiccups in some people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the soft materials are placed under the buttocks, as they would be on a bed of several chambers.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the soft materials is that they are placed under the buttocks at the beginning and gradually reduced by gentle pressure, and do not prolong the position of the soft materials, but rather pause them more frequently, and keep them in place, so that the humors can reach the area equally.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the area already reddened and swollen, and that the pain of the spine appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you should shave and cut the hair in small portions, and then consider the position of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that person who has thin flesh and is prone to sores, you should shave them once and not again, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the fan to blow on the shaving and cut the hair in small portions, and at the same time facilitate the process.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the skin is thick, then shave twice, because in the first shaving, you open the path to the artery and the softness of the area.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second shaving, you can make an incision for the extraction of thick skin.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the skin is very dirty, then make a thorough shaving in the third shaving to get rid of it.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the skin in small portions or a small piece, we need shaving.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a large piece of skin, we need a large shaving; and if we know that the skin is thick, then shave in preparation for the extraction.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term for incision in which the depth of the wound is only so much.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the one whose wound is thick, hard, black, and its pores are straight, then it is recommended that the locations of the blisters be more gentle, open, and resolved; if it is in the summer, use oil of aloe or oil of violat or oil of allspice or oil of cement of goat; and if it is in the winter, then use oil of narcissus or oil of lily or oil of camomilla or of sandalwood.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and sour, then use oil of ambergris or oil of balsamita or oil of aloe or oil of anethi or similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the blister-maker is of wide pores of thin flesh, then it is recommended to prohibit oil, and it is recommended that for these locations of blisters, they be washed with warm water or sour water of salt or water of goat or water of borax, and similar ones.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the patient's skin is of moist nature, wash their feet with warm water or with a mixture of salt, vinegar, and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the patient has thick sweat, wash their feet with warm water or with a mixture of wormwood, of cedar, of camomile, or similar substances.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is recommended that the footbath be given immediately after the bath; having been given, it should be administered close to the bath for an hour or two, and it should be allowed to dry near the foot.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is the reason why a bleeding person should not take a footbath before the footbath?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	If the person who is to be bled or the one who is to give the bloodletting is angry and has a sharp tongue, and if the skin is red and inflamed, then it is recommended that cooling causes be used, such as sour milk, warm water, ice, julep, and similar substances.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And place their food and meat, such as pork, and meat from game birds, and cooked vegetables, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And of that which has a bad complexion, such as barley bread or barley flour, and sumac, and any other fragrant spice between old and new; and it is recommended that it be used in small amounts of food and drink, and place the food of that person with pork and game birds and pigeons and small birds and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And on the day of ventozacio and flu botomia, the bread should be greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it should be given in bread to some people in the form of alpharac, or medicaments of musk, so muscated, or alcelita denant the ventozacio or denant fleubotomia or approaching, so that the main members are comforted and that the sick is subtilized; and it is not recommended that they take that scalfatz.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	When the incisions are made on the patient's body, they should be made over the ribs, over the belly and gout, over the navel, in the locations of the joints, and on the widest part of the thigh, as these members do not suffer incision on themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those but to attract blood from the member, such as a blister over the breast in case of flux of blood from the blood of the nose; and use that which dissolves the blood visibly from the member, such as a blister on the belly and navel; because that rarefies the member and drains it and relieves the pain when the blood is dissolved.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is placed over the ribs when they occur in their inflammation or boil, because by virtue of the attraction strong water heals the inflammation and eradicates the boil from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, when it is placed on the ribs and belly to draw out blood in those who are closed up.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these vapors are administered through steam alone; and some vapors are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some vapors are administered full of warm water for the patient's illness.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is to make the steam full and big, it is only water or water in which herbs suitable for that have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of vapor administered with fire: the width of the opening of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the remedy should be the most of a palm; and it should be in the direction of the patient, in the place that is in the circuit, the most of him, the tube should be small according to the amount that enters into him with a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of wax or citrus, of large margins, lion, equal and rough so that it does not damage the member because of its position on the patient.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it should be at the side of the patient, a transverse wax or iron bar, on which the candle is placed by the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And now let's consider this great wind that we have recommended; and the lesser one of those that follow the diseases and the state of that who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the winds of children and wear them out are different from the winds of young people and large-breasted women.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this wind on the member is that it extends the muscle with a decent amount of fire from a small candle of wax, and place it on the edge of the verge transverse in the middle of the wind location, so that the fire is lit around the part that is not burned to the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then place it on the member of the patient, and say the incantation that we have said, until you have the winds and do not order them to open the mouth and let the steam escape over that mouth, then the wind will soon be dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then apply it according to its manner, and repeat it if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In the case of a patient with pleurisy, water is administered, which has no transverse or vertical line, and is not administered unless it is filled with water and placed on the member alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is how it is done: And the more this wind bag is large, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in any member except in the members where it is impossible to position windbags, such as teeth and gums and similar parts; or in a naked member of flesh, such as the nose and ears and similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that have been found bloodletting vessels that are in the waters of clean ponds.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And they should be placed in water pond during the day and night, until they are famished, and there is no cause in the belly of those; and the body should be evacuated at the beginning with cupping and windbags; and the member of the patient should be rubbed before it becomes red; and they should be placed on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and closed.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck out the wound with a pump, it is better to do so later in the process.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the wound with warm water and a lot of it; and rub and squeeze it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body of the wounded person is extended, place it in a tub of cold water, and place that which is above where the blood is collected underneath.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the wound is multiplied, then powder over it with vitriol or similar substances to stop the bleeding before the blood is absorbed; or place the most mature beans that have been cooked on the wound and leave them until the beans stick to the wound, and then remove the blood.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repeat the process of removing blood, when it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the blood is prohibited from being suspended, then rub the wound with fresh blood or insert a needle into the places where blood can escape; and place them until those that have some blood soon disappear.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you want them to vomit, sprinkle some three-fingered aloes powder, salt, or ashes on those areas, and they will soon vomit.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Here begins the section of the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh child, know that foolish doctors and the vulgar and those who sometimes do not follow the books of the Ancients or read one letter of them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the sciences in our earth is hidden; and I have not done it before, but I am obliged to do it now because of the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding until I extracted the science of them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then direct yourself to experiment and study in the length of your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described all of that in this chapter that contains the greatest science and about which I have passed my best experiment; therefore, I open it to you others and deliver it from that occupation of elongation; and I open it at the end of opening; and I show it at the end of declaration; and I form it into those forms of instruments that are administered in that, as it is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collection of facts about bone fractures, including those that must be mentioned before we begin to remember the different types of fractured and varied limbs of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Let us then say what is said in the preface of this chapter; and the chapters according to the understanding of which it is advisable for craftsmen and those who know or learn this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore say that when something happens to someone with a fracture or dislocation or torsion or crushing, it is advisable to begin with the examination of the affected part, or another, if no cause prevents it, as long as it does not weaken its strength, or it is the one that has happened, or is old and decrepit, or it is at a time of great heat, or of great cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with eating fresh herbs and meats of birds and crabs; and do not eat large pieces of meat or fill up on foods and all food that fills the veins with pus, as long as you are sure of abscess caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their first regular position, which is usually on their back.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the bone begins to be restored, then feed the patient with nutritious foods that are thick and heavy in which there is viscosity, such as their foods made of wheat flour, water, rice, and peas, and meat from cows, and hooves, and fresh fish, and large and similar foods to those, and this regimen is done by coagulation of fracture more gently and more.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that bones heal when they are in men who are in the first stage of a disease and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature by the drying out of their members from.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature for all time by the drying out of those members, and they continue and are consolidated those that are from them at the end of leniency, such as the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	May nature adjust and anneal over the broken bone of every part, some cause similar to glue in which it is grossly used that adheres and strengthens that entrance which is congealed and joined together, through which venomous laughter comes from great strength and firmness, as with fire at the beginning, through which no cause prevents its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this cause it is necessary to place the bandages of the patient, bandages in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Great variety of fracture according to variety of limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the types of fracture are different according to the variety of limbs, for example the fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the skull; and the fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the shoulder; and similarly all other members are different from each other.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have remembered the type of every fracture, explained in its separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Great variety of fracture in such a case.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	There are various types of bone fractures in their cases; some are arcuate fractures, others occur in the stars; and some are longitudinal fractures: and some are fractures of the skull and stars and addictions that proceed and do not proceed, as is done in the pen when it is prepared to write, and the fracture is a plague and disruption in the head, and the fracture is a small fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And in all cases, there is a particular torment in the restoration of it according to what will come from the distinct remembrance of it in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Great shock of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for that reason, bone fracture is known as: the twisting of it, and its elevation and appreciation to the sensation, and some are from the hand at your touch.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no twisting in the place and it is not made by your touch when you touch the bone in its movement and the patient does not have great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is twisting or a small fissure, where you may not be able to place your hand and compress everything; then pause over the area of the medicines of which you remember at that moment; and then keep it straight by a subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	You should know that when the place is curved and does not split into two or another, what does not happen in the same part of the body, as it is remembered from the whole part of the patient, then you should begin to correct the hand that happened to the apostema caut.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an apostema caut happens, then leave that for a few days until it ceases; and then gently move the hand in any way you can with lifting and twisting.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	You should know that the restoration of the hand and its sharpness is more difficult than from the bone in which the accident happened to the body.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen that which will come after the remembrance of the hand.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the bone is fractured, it is necessary to extend this member bent in two parts, whether it is the arm or the leg; or if your hand is small, use two cords or one cord and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And if your position is such that you place the member in the same way as its natural figure, while the parts of the broken member are extended, then pierce those attachments with a needle and return them to their places according to each method that you can find in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful not to injure the patient with your operation or their injury; and pierce them according to your power that you apply the one bone to the other as a companion according to the best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And cover that in that hour you touch your hand at that place, and if you see any different cause here, rectify it and equalize it according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as some foolish doctors who move their hands too much cause abscess by their operation, or they cause contraction in the member as we have seen in their operation of moving their hands too much.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And approach the appropriate position and proper operation and stricture of that member, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make sure he does not move that part in the hour of his vigils and sleep, and observe his movement and agitation, and control his excretion, and control all his movements with all his virtue; and wait until the position of the member is a position in which the pain is secure, which causes the pain when it is in the position of the member's disposition; then change that to another position of which he does not feel pain; and guard that that position of yours that member is straight and equal, so that the member does not suffer tortuosity when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the member's stricture is that which I recommend; so that you know that twisted members vary in their position and size and in the shape of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small, like the arm and the finger and similar to those, then make sure the covering is of very thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	When those who are obese have them with a cushion or a pillow, cover them with a cloth that is thick and durable, because the softness of the cloth connects the large member strongly to all parts, equally preventing any injury.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then, begin your evacuation of equality, place a suitable bandage over the location of that fracture, with three or four layers on the member as soon as it becomes soft; and strengthen your hand a little to hold the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then, approach that to the most elevated part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen your hand so that it does not break the structure that you have strengthened at the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then, lengthen your hand slightly into the covering of the location of the fracture, and gradually soften the structure little by little, until you feel a large part of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then, take another bandage and wrap it around the other wound over the location of the fracture, and approach your operation to the structure of the covering and the softening of that second one which we have said in the first covering.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And if there is a curvature between the toes of the lion or the cloth that equals the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is tortuosity in it; otherwise, do not place anything on it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And if there is another bend, place something on it that has been made decently of thin sheets, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area; otherwise, place something on it that drains the abscess and reduces the inflammation; and leave it for several days; and later strengthen it with those.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And if the sheets are made of canna da lavanda raza, and they have been made skillfully; or they are of pi; or of palm fronds; and let the width of each sheet be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, make sure that the sheet placed over the fracture is thicker and longer than the other sheets, and let the length of the sheet be according to its length and thickness; and strengthen it with another band according to your first structure; and let the layer above be made decently as we have said about the structure, and that your structure should be according to the location of the fracture and the longer it is, the stronger the structure.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is important that the threads be smooth and thin, and of good quality; and if the threads are thick, as she has seen in the operation of removing a cataract by pulling the thick threads of the eye, and this is a great error when the stricture is equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And very thin threads are not convenient, because you will not be able to sew through the stricture with those that you want, and it is not good if there is a gap between each stitch.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is sewn up near the stricture with the ends of the needles in the wrong places, then pause and place a piece of leather or carmined wool between them to prevent injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are caused by blows, and some occur in the spine, and she has found them to be remembered in that one in the second chapter of singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that all broken bones are not immediately straightened on the first day; the reason for this is that the bone, when it is large, does not allow to be placed over the needles sooner than five or seven days, according to your certainty of the occurrence of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of bandages used by ancients to treat fractures, dislocations, and sprains.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The method of bandaging for the treatment of fractures, which is most suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, where no heat or moisture is required: you should take powdered flour, and the middle part of the flour that can prevent the movement of the bone in the parts of the mold.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if it is like that, you should crumble that bread into the wound, and place the compresses on it, which are not too thick or thin; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of bandage for treating fractures, dislocations, and sprains: recipe of asafetida, of lavender, of acacia, of aloe, and of myrrh, which is made from milkweed salt, of all one drachm. x; of manna and aloe one drachm v; alochil one drachm xx; all mixed with oil or bread if the wound of the patient is scalded; and then use this bandage, which is of good composition and restores the broken bones more quickly, and confers strength to many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of bandaging that helps with fractures and twists: take migrach and mix with white aloe powder, x; of myrrh and aloe vera powder v; of acacia powder vi; of Armenian bole .xx.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All these ingredients should be ground in a large mortar with contrition, and their crumbs, and their powders are administered with water or with egg white.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of bandaging for joints and separated bones at those places, and for accidental pain in those areas and fissures and fractures: take a silk thread and dip it in a mixture of vinegar and oil and place it on the wound.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	The virtue of this plaster is not for healing, but for treating abscesses and expelling pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of bandaging that heals broken bones: take willow leaves and wild poppy leaves; grind them all and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of bandaging applied to the healing of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the permanent inflammation of abscesses: take aloe root, camomile flowers, and violet flowers, flour of eggshells, all ground together and x; grind all these ingredients and their powders with vinegar if the limb is not suppurating.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is bleeding, then apply a wet cloth or a cloth soaked in cold water to it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of applying plasters that is stronger in resolution than this first one, when dealing with a long-standing abscess: take the leaves of althea and seeds of lime, balm, melissa, majoram, violet flowers, camomile, all parts of it, and soak them in cold water or warm water or milk; all of this should be ground into a paste and applied to the affected area according to the quality of the limb and its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Ypocras does not recommend using his own free will that it be placed on the limb that is swollen with gout, but rather a cerate made of wax and oil should be used; and he recommends that it be applied between the thickness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	However, in Galen's opinion, it should be placed on the limb that is swollen with gout for its restoration and to treat the causes in which there is a slight loss of heat, such as sweating and similar symptoms to those we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A plaster that soothes the injury and pain: Take equal parts of honey, water, the scraped skin or hair of a man, aloe, salt; grind them with a mortar and pestle, and make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount should be proportional to the severity of the wound and the location; consider whether it does not cause pain or inflammation, nor fracture the bones, nor is too close to the bone, then you should not apply for more than a few days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if it causes pain, inflammation, or swelling at the location, then remove it in that hour and replace the plaster.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and sea sponge, wet with lion's humid urine, and submerge it in warm water; then wash the location until the swelling and pain are reduced; and let the member rest for an hour; and place a wool pad soaked in vinegar and oil on it, and cover it with a cloth for a night until you are sure of preventing abscess, and that the inflammation of the member is reduced, and that the pain of it is relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then gently repeat that delicate structure and apply a small and not too strong plaster for your first construction, and gently insert it into the area that is healing.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and the swelling and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents have already been completely healed, and if you need to apply plaster and structure, then repeat what you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no harm has befallen the member of those that we have said, then do not remove it for three days or four or five or six; and sometimes all of this is left for twenty days after you have appeared through the removal of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and settles on the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the structure more than in your first construction, and adjust it according to the swelling of the patient's wound, after the reminder of which.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you see that the location of the fracture has dried up and become more exhausted than usual, then you know that the nourishment should not reach that place; therefore, apply cold water compresses to the entire affected area for three days; and after that, loosen the bandage a little, and for this operation, the nourishment reaches the member, and it is healed more efficiently.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	If that which the foolish restorers of the fractured limb do not return to its original state when it is not restored, according to its usual condition, and it is restored according to its tortuosity, it is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if that were done incorrectly, it would increase the ancient injuries in their free movements and aggravate the limb.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen anyone of them do that, therefore it is reasonable that they should not do that.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter two: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are different, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are distinct, because some fractures are caused by the impact of a space, and the impact is throughout the bone, which is located behind the bone, just like it happens in the staff, and for that reason this type is called an "ascial"; or the space penetrates into one part of the bone, and penetrates into its flesh and does not pass through the entire back of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the pain from these two fractures is either great or small, and the type of fracture is either contracted or atricious; and the cause of this is a strong blow or a fall on stone, and similarly.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is either penetrating and approaching the periosteum which is located under the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the pain from these two fractures is either great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And the type of fracture is that it occurs in the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and for this reason this special fracture is called hairline.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this fracture is made either by a fall or by a blow on stone, and similarly, which causes some bone plate to break into pieces, and it is made in the concave location as happens to the ribs when they are hit and broken into pieces.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is more commonly made in the human body, such as its ribcage.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these special fractures are caused by such sharp objects as separate the bones.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you would like to remove everything that is in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you would like to detect all these special fractures by examining them and the foul meat that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And a special kind of fracture is known by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and is cleaned, and is covered with the foul meat, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider the symptoms of the patient at the beginning, and if you see through the symptoms that indicate clearly by manifest signs such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of understanding, abscess of the tongue, fainting, acute fever, and swelling of the glands and pain in those parts, and similar to the symptoms in the major dispositions, these are not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see unusual symptoms, you hope for recovery, then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	This is the cause why it happens that if it comes to your place on the first day when it was placed and it is in the days of winter, then you should study in the osteology of the bone giving the day fourteenth completely disposed.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then you should study the bone on the seventh day, having that what was left of the bone is corrupted by the pancreas, and that accidents occur which we have mentioned.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the pancreas covering the brain, and it is small and atrophied, then you should scrape the small and atrophied part, according to what I will tell you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you raise the head of the patient placed, and disclose over the bone according to custom and your possible according to the figure of the placement, and that it is lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if an accident occurs to you in the detection of the bone, flow of pus or abscess caution, then you should pause at the patient's side and that what you cover, and it is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and olive oil, and make a new placement inside before the abscess is sedated, and be sure of flowing pus; and then begin in the circumference of the bone and in its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first method is that you insert a straight needle into the bone in this way: And then administer another needle slightly wider than that one.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer the wider needle.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should have different needles of various widths, some wider than others, and some shorter than the others, with sharp ends of their tips, and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them to strike the needle with force so that it does not hurt the head and cause harm.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then pierce it around the circumference of the needle, using needles that are called "shallow taravals".
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And these are not called anything else but that they do not penetrate the end of the bone at which point you approach it, so that the taraval has a rounded tip or margin on top of that which is left behind, similar to the edge or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the density of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient for you to take many of these needles, as many as each bone requires, until it is in your present at all tests of the brain, where the end is sharp, the quantity in length and brevity should be according to the quantity of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of needles: The quality of piercing through the circle of the broken bone is that you place the needle on the bone and revolve it around its tips until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; then move the needle to another location, and place it where the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around that area.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert the fine forceps that you have between each part of the bone, and do it as gently as possible, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for disturbing the things that have appeared at that location, such as thin and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be sure to guard against any cause that the forceps may touch the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus, after you have circled the bone perforations, and if it is continued with the same instrument, and that one extracted, be careful that it is as sharp and as fine as the other instruments used for such purposes.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there is any fragment of the small bones and sharp ones, then take that one with the instrument you should use for such purposes; and apply it to the wound and find those which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is long and fearful, which Guilielmus and the Laurentius have praised greatly; and this is the word of it: necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone in which the fracture is most violent and most manifest, before you have discovered that part and placed behind it the end of this slow and happy instrument of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And that the lens-shaped fragment is lion and does not penetrate any cause, and the sharp fragment is of the same length as the other in two parts in front in length, as sometimes; that the lens-shaped fragment is adjusted to the bone with the face of the sharp fragment penetrating into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Approach the incision with a small sharp knife in one part of the bone until you have completely cut through it, and be sure to not accidentally cut yourself in the accident that you fear in any way, and if the doctor was the most experienced of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly,
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If there is any cause that attaches to the bone of the skin in other places of the bone, cut that one at the end of the incision that lens-shaped, and release that one with ease, which is released from its harm and its fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the skin, and that which is cut or left on the bone is the surface of it, and it is rough and subtle, then cover that roughness and remove those subtleties with razor-sharp blades that you have prepared for that purpose, in various quantities so that it is possible to administer them at all locations conveniently and properly, and the second one after that in which you lost your operation that bone broken and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you should administer in your ratio the medicine that you used at the beginning to make the bones thin, and then use it closer to the most subtle part of it, and do not stop doing this until you reach administering the thinnest one of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In each of the other small fractures and thin fracture, you should administer treatment according to what you lost for its correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is not caused by all those that have been studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And you should pay attention to what we have shown in large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the skin is torn when you remove the bones, then you should take cloth of the second quantity of the wound, and submerge that in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first one, doing this as well as possible without causing pain to the patient; and then administer a thick layer of liniment, and do not strengthen it more than the amount that the wound has.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Let that patient rest from this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess's healing; then remove it and administer medicines that increase moisture, such as linseed and flour of eggs, and powder of alum and aristolochia, and similar substances to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	You should make these medicines into powder that is ground on a plate, if they are dry; and generally, administer all the medicine of property of which is to remove and not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard yourself the second that the wound in your cure is not infected; and it is not in the surdity of poison or other; nor do you let it aggregate virulence in it; because when it is adjusted on the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts that and pollutes that, and it happens to the patient aforementioned that malicious malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the cerebral cortex, where from there the bone is formed and more when it is pressed on its cure, and it becomes black on the surface of it; and therefore consider that if it happens to the patient these accidents that we have said, know that it is paranoid.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If no black magic is involved in the medicine that is placed above, and it is due to the power of that medicine that it cures the black magic, then you should take a piece of honey and four pieces of oiled cloth, and place them on that part; and then cover that with a cloth, and care for that with the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	About the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You should know that the nose is not broken into two parts, but rather into four parts, somewhat closer together, or one of those curved ones, because there are two bones in it, and the part that is left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, but only bent and twisted and swollen.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts is broken, then you should introduce a small splint into that part of the nose, and equalize that fracture by means of the two splints, and then cover it with the appropriate treatment until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this to help you, and be careful not to cause harm to the patient during your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not allow for vision, then cover it with a small, round bandage.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the same thing.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And cover the wound with a bandage for its restoration on the first day after the fracture, if possible; otherwise, then apply the seventh or tenth day to heal the abscess cautiously.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and let them fill the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And say to the ancient healers that the splints should be wrapped in cloth, and moved around the entire day, but not seen by me; having covered the piece with a piece of linen cloth mixed with powdered myrrh; and then leave it until the bone is stopped and the cartilage is strengthened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some bandages should be placed in the nose, in place of a gag, or else they would be wrapped in cloth from the lion's mane; and that the fracture of the nose is more violent and that the patient should not be prohibited from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, make bandages.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another bandage causes an abscess, apply a plaster to the nose with beeswax or with a solution of egg yolk and rose oil, or with diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	However, if no abscess occurs, then cover that deformed part with a plaster made of starch and powdered alum, and place it on the lion's mane, and do not leave the nose uncovered for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	However, if the bones of the nose are broken or comminuted due to a small fracture, then cover those, and remove those with instruments that are appropriate for them; and place this laceration, and heal it with what encases and consolidates, and with plasters that are appropriate.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If there is a nosebleed, then apply pressure to the nostrils and administer a plaster of gum into it until it stops bleeding.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture does not bleed, look at whether the fracture is only slightly deformed and not completely separated into two pieces and curved to the parts inside, then it can be easily treated.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is in the middle, then introduce your finger from the patient's mouth on the right side of the jaw; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, then introduce your finger from the patient's mouth on the left side; and push it against the softness of the fracture inside to facilitate the deformed parts, with your other hand on the part of the deformed bone; and hold it in place.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two pieces, then apply traction to the two parts in a straight line until it is possible to realign them.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a dislocation of teeth to fracture, then use those that you hope will remain intact, such as gold or silver or cedar; and place them over the broken jaw, and place them over the doubled cloth, and place a large steady sheet decently made, or a weight equal to the length of the jaw; and hang it above second according to what you have prepared for its application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place a lemon on his lips.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then on the third day you should remove and discard it; and apply what has been altered from it with plaster of moli, album of egg, or cornstarch, so that you have the cedar of the patient, and place a lion's wool over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then with this annex and adjust that plaster on it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it until it is healed and strong the fracture; because this fracture is strictly in three months.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another complication occurs, such as an abscess, then administer the same remedies we mentioned in the treatment of that wound, and it will remain healed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is severe, consider whether the bone has separated or is displaced. If it has, then carefully remove those displaced fragments with instruments that are appropriate for that purpose.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the orifices of the wound are narrow, then enlarge them with a bodkin according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And after you have removed those displaced fragments and they do not remain in place, then enlarge the orifices of the wound if they are wide; otherwise, place one of the appropriate dressings over that area and keep it there until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the scapula when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The scapula is broken in the middle of the part where it is attached to the shoulder muscle, and that fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When the bone is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not match; and it is more difficult for its restoration; or if there are any complications in the surrounding area, and it is difficult to restore; or if the fracture is complex.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in this case, when the fracture is complex, is to have two assistants, so that one holds the helper and follows the broken clavicle, and the other stretches the neck towards that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then align the fracture with the shoulders until it is made in the shape of the second rib, and not in the elevation or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if more extension is needed, then cover it with cloth or wool, and make it according to the amount of your need; extend and elevate the clavicle and tie it with your hand until the fracture is aligned as desired.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot tie the end of the clavicle to the parts forward, so that it does not reach the shoulder, then have the patient lie on their back, and place a pillow of appropriate size over the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant will take the muscle of the patient to the parts that have been entered before the bone of the furcula is raised to be in the position on him, and then you will correct the fracture and equal it to those called the ties.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel pain in the furcula and its muscles, then cover that and remove those pains with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is held in the bone, then you will make an incision on that with one of the scissors that you have prepared for this, since you have placed under the furcula the instrument that serves the chisel; and this instrument is a hammer or an iron of which this is the shape of it:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a mallet of which this is the concavity; and its width is according to that which you have needed from it, according to the size of the bone or the weakness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	If the length of it is according to what is possible to the operation; that there should be two extremities there, and one extremity should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the bone's suture is wide, and it is certain of abscess formation, then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the disruption is narrow, or you fear abscess formation, then you fill the wound with gauze and powders according to the amount of the wound's incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If an abscess forms, then pour in warm water mixed with rose oil and vinegar, and place it over the affected area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the bone is exposed to wound and incision, place a poultice made of flour of mold mixed with egg white on it, and place it over the affected area, covering the tissue of the foot, if necessary, and then apply warm water soaked in linen cloth that has been used by Saracens, which should be long and wide enough to cover the entire foot; and then place powdered starch on the poultice and the cloth; and then place a thin, flexible tablecloth over the affected area, and then wrap the draped cloth around the tablecloth in the location of the fracture; and then apply warm water as it evaporates, and roll the cloth around the neck of the foot and behind the tissue of the foot, and reduce it to cover all parts, and when the bone's exposure decreases, and this is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And even if the splint above the broken bone is not well-fitted; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the bandage is softened or you replace the splint, then you should adjust it and strengthen the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's pillow on their shoulder, and place another pillow behind their back to support their back in bed at night; so that the helper can elevate the patient from the side of that person, and thus raise the fracture of the sternum at elevation of the muscle; or the arm of the patient is placed on the shoulder of that person.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage unless there is an abscess in the place within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen the surface of the patient at that time, and adjust it in the fracture and restore it until it is restored and the fracture of the sternum has coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and made more comfortable according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some treatments are done in men of that time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of a broken shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken on the side of the shoulder, but it is not broken through the shoulder, only its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the shoulder is broken — and it is broken in the middle of the shoulder — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, prepare the shoulder and reduce it to its natural shape in any way possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place powdered flour of almond milk and stopper on the shoulder; and then place pulverized cloth doubled over; and then place a thin layer of table salt according to the amount of the spatula or more than a small amount.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the layer is concave in any part of the spatula, then level that concavity with stopper and press the layer evenly.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then apply strength above the stopper with a long needle and firmly fix the layer until it does not remain in its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament in each day; and all the times that it is softened, tie another bandage and strengthen it and straighten the leg if it remains in its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the patient on their left side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the splint is restored in 10 days or in .25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and you know that it is from the bones of which the beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the bone of the foot and place it under the skin, then you cut through it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio de apostema caut if this happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The chest is broken in some places of it and that ends there; but the extremities of it are not cut and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	When the patient's foot is broken, it bends in parts and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, and severe vomiting and diarrhea; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of the bone is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a cushion should be placed between their shoulder blades; and then press on the muscles of the foot, adjust the ribs of the foot to the level of two times the thickness, and gently perform the operation of the bone and its alignment according to all possible methods that are appropriate and convenient until it returns to its original shape.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place the plaster and bandage over the affected area on a thin tablecloth or cloth, so that you can wrap it in cloth; and gently apply that to the broken bone so that it is not too tight; and then apply some lotion to the back of the hand, and strengthen the bandage with a proper structure; and consider the swelling in the whole hour, and when it becomes soft, strengthen that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to remove the bandage or plaster that has caused pain, swelling, abscess, or infection at that location, then you should remove and discard that one and apply a new ointment to treat the wound; and if you see that it is healing, then adjust the bandage until it is completely healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the ribs when they are bruised.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You should know that rib fractures do not occur except in the larger, thicker ribs that are located on both sides; and at their extremities, near the spine, they do not occur due to contraction but because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And if you do not know about it, you should not hesitate to ask the doctor about it.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be done in such a way that it matches the fracture as much as possible, until it is completely healed, and then apply an ointment and strengthen the broken rib with a bandage or splint according to the doctor's instructions.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the rib fracture is declining towards the inner parts, the patient experiences severe pain and puncture, similar to the puncture that occurs in someone who has coughed, and because of this, the bones are covered with a cloth; and they experience difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting, and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	The ancients also had devices for that great purpose.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	They said that coverings placed over the patient's body that cause inflation and ventilation, so that the abdomen is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the outer parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	However, we should avoid this because it may not cause the generation of an abscess, if it does not occur; and if it has already occurred, then we should help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they said that the covering should be placed above the windpipe and that it should suck strongly; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the windpipe may draw the excess fluid into the wound due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they said to them: cover that place with a wool blanket that has already been immersed in hot oil, and place powders between their ribs until it is full, which should be the same thickness as when you wrapped the second bandage; and then cure the patient with the care of pains from food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient experiences very strong constraint that they have not suffered before, and the bones push the bandage at the puncture, cover over the patient, then cut open the area, revealing the broken rib, and place your hand over that instrument that contains the cipher, the remembrance of which is preceded, and that they should cut the bones to facilitate, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the loose lips of the wound, if it is large, with ointment, and cure that with ointments until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess is formed, then you should cover and insert powders in hot oil and place over the area, and that the patient be cured with that which covers the abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him be placed on his left side while he is sleeping until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9:
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Concerning the recovery of a broken spine of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes, fractures occur in the bones of the neck and chest, and they are attached to their respective muscles, similarly to the spines of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when such an accident occurs to someone and you wish to know whether they will be healed or not, consider this: if the bones are already softened, stupefied, dead, and cannot move or strengthen them, and when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel any pain in those places, then know that they are not healed, and in such cases it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they feel pain in those places when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see similarities in the spines of the neck to what has been described and wish to know whether they will be healed or not, then consider their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you see that it has already been softened, apply the same remedies that are used for these conditions, and when it is on its side, it becomes difficult to urinate and defecate, and sometimes some people lie on their side and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is dangerous, and therefore do not treat it.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If none of these causes occur, the cause is better and less severe.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment of this is that you pierce the abscess with a sharp needle or a lancet dipped in warm oil or some other medicine; place some bandages on it until the abscess is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And later place one of the healing and existing plasters on it, and strengthen it with a bandage; command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where the pain occurs until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it occurs that the tissue of the bone is separated from it or some other cause that has already been separated from it, then cover it with a bandage and apply some medicine to it; if it is large, use sutures; and later cure it with some ointment containing blood.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the lower back of the spine is fractured, and it is at the end of the coccyx, then insert your left hand into the anus, and equalize the broken bones as much as possible; and place a poultice and bandage on it, if necessary, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken ribs in that area, then perform surgery on it, and remove that, and cure the wound with the treatment that is preceded by it until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the restoration of the jaw.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the jaws are broken, and if they are broken, then the fracture of those is only communication at their extremities and they are inserted lengthwise and decline to the parts within; and the patient experiences pain in that location and puncture, and the bedcover is stupefied when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it so that it is above the fracture, which is its figure.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is only at the end of it, then you should apply the second splint that you have available for equality, equal to the length that is necessary to be assembled to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is long or declines to the parts below, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach until you are prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have splinted it, place your hand on that plaster, and also on that star of wood or iron, and strengthen the structure over which you do not fear puncture of the fracture or removal of the star.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And splint the concavity with that which you have placed on it to maintain the structure according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their side or their back.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should cease from extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and place on it that which was previously used; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen that which is there with a cover.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If the bones of the spine are fractured or broken, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the humerus.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Humerus is that which is between the ribs and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, the first of which you grab hold of with your hand placed flat on the ground like this:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And if it is attached in two ends of two bands, then suspend it from the elevated position.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on a chair; and then gently extend their broken arm over the flat surface until it reaches the tip of the humerus in the middle position where the curve of the arm is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend some heavy object, or the nurse extends it to its parts; and then the doctor places his hand on both sides of the fracture as soon as the fracture returns to its original position.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other handmaid should place the patient on their side and support their neck with her hand; and then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds the other end; and each of them extends their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then press on the fracture with your hand and on the other end with the other hand, and each of the two ministers extends their part.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then place the middle of the cushion on the back and the other behind the fracture on the side.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is close to the side, then place the cushion on that location and on the side.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Equalize it with the other and its work, and when it is equalized according to what is covered and applied well, then press on that side if there is no pus infection.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If an abscess occurs, leave the dressing in place until the seventh day, and apply warm compresses over the affected area until the abscess is ready to be opened, and then you should lance it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of lancing it is to apply plaster over the fracture, and then cover the plaster with a layer of cloth; then place the arm on an assistant, and place your hand on their muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Then place the cloth and lance over the assistant's arm to keep it in place, so that the arm is not dislocated, unless there is any reason why the broken bone should not be moved.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you should place the splint that is closest and strongest to the others over the fracture; and between each splint, leave a space equal to the thickness of the splints, and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture plus three inches on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then place your hand over the bandage that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And your restriction on the location of the fracture should be as straight as possible.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is more curved, the restriction is less.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you see the position of the splints and the restriction as we have said at the time when you restore the member to its original position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear abscess, then leave the restriction and the splints in place as we have said on day seven.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all its parts for three days to prevent it from occurring in the wrong place or inflammation; or eating is prohibited to reach the member due to the disposition of superfluous restriction; and therefore, correct all this as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are sure that no cause of this will occur, then do not remove the ligament for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And the patient's pillow should be on their back, and their hands should be on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place your hand on the assistant's full apron of wool equally, and consider at all times of night or day that the figure of the broken member is not melted or dissolved, or that the ligament has softened, so correct that also with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And place the food of the patient according to the order we have given before, in such a way that the food is thin at the beginning until it is started to strengthen; and later cover it with a cloth.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Because the assistant and the pillow of the patient are usually strengthened in ten days; and later cover it with a cloth, wash it, administer it, and medicate it with the ointments that correct that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is delayed in healing, then do not remove the ligament and the splints within ten days or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is composed of two bones, which are called the radius and ulna; one is small, and that is the one that goes to the wrist, and the other is large and that is the one that is placed behind the small one from the elbow joint.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the main or small intestine is severely burned alone, or together, they are often severely damaged.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small intestine is burned above, its repair is less likely, and its healing is more difficult.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the intestine is burned below the fracture, its healing is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	Even worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken above the small intestine, it is advisable for the doctor to facilitate its healing by keeping a short distance between them.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large intestine is that which is burned, then it is advisable to keep a longer distance between them.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both intestines are burned together, then it is advisable to keep a very strong distance between them.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is advisable to place the hand of the patient over the intestine and extend it on a cushion, with the arm of the patient below, higher than all the others, and the ear should be lower than all the others, and the patient should lie on a pillow that has been placed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion under their head or back, so that the patient does not move too much.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And the assistant should extend their arm on the side farthest from the patient's head or chest, and another assistant should do the same on the opposite side.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the doctor should straighten the bones as much as possible according to the best figure they can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are staggers in the bone fracture, then carefully remove all of it from its original location with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if the stagger appears separate and pulls the string and does not respond to your hopes of restoring it, then do something on it and follow the method we mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is in the middle, you have already treated something like that, and then take care of that cure.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should apply a cloth made of roasted oil and white wax, and it should be between specificity and subtlety, and a strong cloth over that subtle structure until the abscess is cured; and then remove the poultice and place a prepared powder of ground mold and clear hoove, and place splints. And the cloth that is placed over that fracture should be the strongest one.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you know that the number of bones in the arm is in the major dispositions, or if it is a fracture in one phalanx or two at once.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your bandage over the location of the fracture as strongly and as tightly as possible, and when the bandage is more than a span above or below the fracture, place the bandage more loosely according to the previous remembrance in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft cloths, and not hard or sharp, and the best one is the one that is strengthened just enough to move between being subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and the limb close by for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there is any cause for which correction is necessary, as when the member itself is affected, and then make sure that you put the member in water before the problem stops.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And do not force the member until it relaxes, and then return the bandage.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the constriction has already softened and the bone has been reunited and similar to those, then straighten everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive constriction, then gradually soften that one a little and leave it for a few days until the nourishment can reach it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not experience any of those causes that we have mentioned, then do not let it be discharged within the next 20 days or around those times.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And let the hand of the patient be suspended over them for their skill in moving and make them sleep on their side.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 42 days, or if it is strong, it is restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the constitution of the body and the disposition of the skill.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the hand and its fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	When the bone of the wrist and the joints of the said hand are broken, do not move them, but only slightly move them in order to prevent them from becoming displaced.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand is broken or dislocated, let the patient lie down and hold their arm at the same level as the other, and place your hand on the extended arm.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the assistant extends the broken bones and the doctor aligns them in good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then let the assistant apply a poultice and bandage, but be careful not to cause an abscess; and place your hand on the affected area, according to its size, and you have already covered it with a cloth of linen.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the splint is in the parts of the belly of the hand, then make it similar to a bandage, and command the patient to hold it against their bent hand; then stretch the cloth long.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the splint of the bone should be in the cloth in which it is elevated, so that the bone can be applied to the hand; and stretch it according to what is needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the parts of the forearm, then place your hand on one side of the part and another on the other side of the part, so that the wound is open and dry; and then place the structure, as if it were rolled up between the aforementioned bones.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if the fracture occurs in any of the bones of the aforementioned parts, then if it is possible, apply a bandage as soon as possible to the palm and if desired, place a small, dry dressing on it so that the fracture is elevated and not moistened.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other aforementioned parts, such as in the wrist, elbow, ear, or ring finger, then apply a bandage as soon as possible to the same part; or all of them at once, which is better; or place a small, dry dressing on it, as we have said in the forearm.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and apply that, the arrangement of abscess care and opposition — to the aforementioned operation — to that which is appropriate when any cause of those occurs, according to the story of it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the restoration of a broken bone in the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh are broken and are declared to be fractured when they are converted into the part that is highest and most prominent.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of it is done by placing the ligament over the fracture and another ligament under the fracture, and the patient lies on their back and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the healer extends the ligament to its entire length according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is near the knee, then the ligament should be placed at the bottom to the part of the patella, so that the extension can be done on it, and the other ligament under the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, then the ligament should be placed at the bottom of the knee, and the extension should be done to its parts behind.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor should equal the bones by pushing them back into their places as soon as possible and the bone is joined by a good connection; then cover it with a plaster and structure, unless there is an abscess in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If an abscess occurs in the area, then leave that person for several days until the abscess is ready to be opened, and then return to your healing work.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The structure of the fracture is as follows: a callus that covers the fracture, bends it twice or three times, and remains above; then cover the area where it reaches the ankle and the back of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Insert a long needle between the thigh and the bed, where the folds are, and the extremities of the needle should be on the most raised part of the two parts, and then rotate it over the bed and the thigh to remove any excess from the fold.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place your hand on the thigh in the area of the fracture, and place a stone on the bone of the bed.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill the empty spaces between the bed and the thigh with many cloths, so that the fracture is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then begin to apply the fracture strongly from the middle over the area of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you approach the edge of the fracture area, your fracture should be smaller and more flexible and wetter.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then approach the two extremities of the patient to the parts where it reaches the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the bones of the other part so that the ligament is not left in its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then place the structure over that, where there is no risk of corrosion, abscess, inflammation, and similar to those; and if any cause of those occurs, then count that you have removed it from there, and rectify what has happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	However, if the bone that is broken is in the place where it should be, then try to align it as much as possible; and if not, perform surgery on it and replace it, and heal the wound from which the previous memory was made before it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And some of these fractures are strengthened by this bone or another that is adjusted to the bones, as we have said in the assistant and the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	May one not cause the patient to stumble in such a manner during their recovery; and if they are recovered alone, another cushion should be applied on the other side, as it is necessary for them to stand up quickly.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You should know that the cushion is strengthened in several days or a few weeks or a few months, and all of this depends on the variety of constitutions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the recovery of the fracture of the patella of the knee.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that a fracture of the patella of the knee often occurs, but it does not affect the muscles on the back.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If the fracture occurs, it is only a fissure or a crack in its parts, and this is a common occurrence, and over this, everything depends on the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the recovery of it is not equal to what was broken from its parts with the said entrances, which should be attached and joined according to what is possible by equality and facility and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then place a poultice and place it on that round stone, if necessary for that one; and stretch it tightly over the wound.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other fractures, as well as the abscess cautery and similar to those that would be placed on all possible accidents that are suitable for that one before it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You should know that in the ribs there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the rib, and the other is thin and is called the sternum.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens that the kind of fracture that occurs in those two bones of the arm is similar to the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of that one is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if those two bones are broken at once, the ribs are all broken.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thinnest bone is broken, the ribs are converted to the denatal parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the largest bone is fractured, then that one is usually not mended by you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equality, and ligament of the bones according to that one.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But may it be, if the fracture of the leg is not healed by now, that the extension is less and looser, and it will help your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is sometimes an operation on the arm, and it is when you equalize the bones and complete the entire operation, then you take weights of pi iron that is placed behind the causes that are placed in soldiers, and made entirely of palm branches; above those to the ones that have a small growth, and not from hands, and it should be the longest among them according to the longest of the leg, and the denuded part.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap it around each piece of cloth in two folds according to its length, and place one on the side of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and it should be from the denuded part up to the lowest part of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the two sticks in three places of good extremities and at the middle one, where this structure is prohibited to lean on the right and left parts, and it is a good distance.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then an appropriate amount of wood is given according to the length of the bed; and it is placed under the bed to keep it in place.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And more importantly, be careful when doing this in a fracture, and when that happens properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the bed in each day and study what happens behind it, and keep it away from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and if something happens of those, then pause at that moment until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus and bones of the foot and those called.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Fractures do not occur to the talus at all; rather, fractures occur in some bones of the foot; and those called also have few fractures, and do not occur to them but rather in their joints.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot have fracture and sometimes those bones are lifted above each other, then place the patient on their side with their leg prepared as if they were walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place the other foot on top of that which is lifted above those bones, and step on them, and press, and equalize them as they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then place a poultice and a bandage on top of that, and place a small table under the patient's belly with two lids.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen the bandage on the leg with its structure descended, as you have wrapped it in cloths and other causes of which it is in need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And if three or four days pass, then you should remove the bandage, as you found the bones equalized, or they were broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is similar to those with fractures.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if they say those are broken, then restore them, and equalize them as they were before, and recommend to you in the restoration of those of the hand in the treatment of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place your hand along the length of the wound, and put a pad on it; then move the foot to this table that you have prepared, and strengthen that wound with a suitable bandage.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If the wound is deep and involves two or more bones, then place your hand on each part of the wound covered in a lion's cloth, strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and have someone stand on one of the ends of the table to hold the patient's abdomen.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you to remember that you should consider all the causes that have been mentioned to you in the other fractures of the accidents we have discussed; and pause at every accident, what covers it.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the thigh bone, the patella, and the kneecap of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone is fractured, then perform that operation in a lying position, and gradually incline it to the side of the hip, and hold it there.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Approach the midwife and place her in the room with the patient, and do so carefully; then approach the woman and gently lift the patient's back, as all of this is done carefully until the part of the room with the patient is covered and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place a pillow on the patient's back, and when they need to urinate, turn them on their side and remove the urine, then return and place it according to the method used at the beginning, and return to the first pillow.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Do this for seven days or around those days, as it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take a catheter and insert it into the patient's urethra; then inflate the entire catheter into the room of the patient, and blow into the catheter until the catheter is inflated with air, as the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Then inflate it with air and lie still for several days until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the bones of a man or woman's pelvis are fractured, it is administered in the restoration and puncture of that which we have recommended for the bone of the thigh.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is drawn out does not remain hidden in these nearby fractures and what happens often is more to him who has some study and use of this my free writing; because that fracture means to you in the major dispositions via drayturiera in the restoration and structure of it, and therefore understand be.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the wound of a man when it is broken, take guarguamela of cloth, and put the wound in that; and place your hand over it with a covering of cloth, and let it be wrapped up, and let it be laid for three days or around those, and let it be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of bone fractures when they are broken in two.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for him to whom the fracture has occurred, and especially if the bone is large as the bone of the thigh or of the helper, or similar to that, which you should know and follow those times when the conditions of fleubotomy are yours as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the pain continues, then hold the patient's tongue in your hand and sprinkle powder on it, if there is another cause.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture in that leg on that day, and do not prolong it unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	However, if an abscess occurs, then leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, before it bursts, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause more harmful accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	However, if the bone is broken and protrudes above the joint, then pierce it and reduce it to its place, equalizing it with your hands, for ease and short extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	However, if the extension is not at your disposal and the equality of it with your hands is not possible, then reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight palms, and its width is according to the size of the wound; and for that reason, it is necessary for the doctor who uses those three or four according to the amount needed in the cure in all cases of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And make sure it is level, and keep it from being folded in the middle during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should be sharp at the tip where it meets the patient's own extremities; and its underside should be thickest at the bottom, and its upper side should enter into the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "labrys volente atelarem", so this is its name.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that it can be placed on the top of the patient's bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And insert it into a groove that returns the bone, and be equal to some equality.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then force you to equal the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of it is thin, and not taken by the instrument for good reason, then force you to insert the end of that bone into where the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone to all of that which we have recommended, then insert it into where the instruments we have said; or saw it in some way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then remove those that are in the bones of roughness and small scratches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bones are reduced, and the reduction causes the patient great pain, you will know that the bones have not returned to their natural place; and then do this thing that you confer on the patient a great benefit.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is completed, which you do to the bones, and then immerse cloth in strong black stypic, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place it on the wound or any other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not cause burning and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stitches at the time of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound open until you have inserted the thread with forceps and used bandages according to the amount of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to stretch the wound over the fracture, because many times this is done by the folly of doctors, and it causes harm to their patients, which is dangerous.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the ligamentous structure is looser, softer, different from the structure of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear that those harmful accidents which we have mentioned might occur, and there is great pain in the area, then do not place your hand on that spot, but apply that envelope of hard cloths to the wound instead of bandages.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the wound begins to bleed again after a day or two, then remove the cloth that you placed on that spot, and apply a poultice, using those remedies which according to our custom are used to treat wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is advisable for you to remove the ligament and consider the wound on each day at midday and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the perspiration flows from it to the parts behind to facilitate healing.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound lasts for several days and is not consolidated or separated from the arm, then you should know that this is a sign of small infections that cause the wound to fester.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	Of those infections, those that remain separated and extruded, those that do not separate and cause the member to swell and cause pain, you should incise those that are possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If the wound becomes black or yellowish, it is a sign of another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you should apply one of those remedies that are appropriate for it, as described in the previous chapter on that subject.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that remedy in which you should apply your pressure: when the large ones are crushed, raise it above the member as if it were bones and similar to those of large members, and do not assume attraction or removal, because many deaths occur due to this, having left that for 20 or 30 days; and then cure the wound if you see fit, and if not, leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure of nodes that occur at the site of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Nodes occur at the site of healing of a fracture, and especially near joints, and are formed by the shape of the limb; and very often prevent the limb from performing its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, consider if the node is recent and administers in those medicines that have stopped bleeding with aloe, and enses, and mira, and sercacollo, and acrassia, and similar to those; taking some or all of them, and confirm that these are very stiptic, or album of honey, or very astringent, and place that on the node in a cloth, and tightly bind it over the node for good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And loosen the bandage that does not release it for several days; and remove that and apply another, until the node is reduced; or strengthen on that layer of plaster, which has the property of regrowing everything that is inflated in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the joint is already hardened and narrowed and does not cause pain, it should be cut from the most accessible part of it, and the excess and protruding parts should be removed or scraped away until it is remedied; and cure it before it becomes healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the fracture is restored and the limb is returned to its original position, it should not be set in a way that is not natural.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb is returned to its original position, it should not be done unless for several reasons: one of which is the solution of the ligament and the cord of the limb made not according to its time; or for excessive stricture of the ligaments before the nutrient can run to the limb; or for excessive embrocation; or for superfluous movement not in its time; or for weakness in the body of the patient and for its debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to apply heat to the patient and make their body warm before the inflammation increases; and administer baths; and use hot compresses and laudanum on it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place a poultice on the affected limb, so that the poultice draws out the remaining moisture or continues to bring warm water to it, until the moisture returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the treatment of broken bones that are healing improperly and preventing their operation due to this.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When an accident occurs to the already healed limb, causing it to become crooked and swollen at the broken bone and joint, and it is thought that this will prevent its natural operation, you should not accept the word of anyone who claims that this limb is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	However, many foolish doctors and healers have done this in our time; and this operation is very blameworthy because it causes great fear, which can be fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the swelling and pain are recent, it is recommended to apply a poultice made of softening herbs such as althea leaves, rue, melliot, and similar ones; or make a plaster with diallaguilon that is well prepared; or use a poultice made of ground rue and mixed with honey or olive oil, and similar to those used for consolidation medicines.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some waters are dissolved in frequent light friction with the most humid ones, and they are administered to move the limb in all its parts at all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the twisting has already become severe and is strong and turned into bone and causes the need for treatment with iron, it is recommended to remove the pus from above the dead tissue and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and use a sharp instrument to cut away any excess swelling from the affected area, and apply this to facilitate movement in that joint.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is an essential part of some joints of the body, which is why it is prohibited from moving, and distorts the shape of the limb, causing severe pain and injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is usually necessary to perforate it in order to reduce it, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very painful, and it is difficult to reduce the dislocation at that time.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And to avoid this, it is not necessary for the limb to be maimed or stretched during the inflammation stage, because prolonged periods of time can cause spasms and slow pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, it is usually necessary to use the method of reduction of the patient's limb, and not allow the abscess to form; then, the limb should be anointed with warm water and oil, and then reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member should be treated with this remedy that will come to its location.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the capital of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the shoulder, enter into the part that is behind it.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the jaw from behind.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the lower jaws are not dislocated; and the dislocation of the others is made in one of two ways: that they are pushed back to their places by a slight movement, and they are slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and closed, until they are softened at the part of the joint between which the saliva of the patient flows out, and he cannot hold it nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his cheek.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of it is slight, then in the major positions return to its place by itself.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	When the dislocation is complete and closed, then apply reduction of it more gently, and do not delay for a long time.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the patient's head, and insert the doctor's fingers from one side of the jawbone into the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both fingers together in the middle, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers on the cheeks, which should be equal; and command the patient to stop biting their jaws and let those parts come back to their place; and the doctor should equalize the jaw and press it until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, until it becomes easier to reduce both dislocations and not delay the reduction of both.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they are returned and equalized, and the patient's mouth is closed and not molded, then place some wool from the cloth on those parts, and make it with beeswax and oil; and apply it to facilitate the movement of the jaws.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And the patient's body should be placed on its side, with his head between two pillows, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force him to turn for any reason; having his usual food, then loosen the lion's grip when the pain is relieved and the jaw is unlocked, then he will be able to open his mouth.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with ease, and do not force the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, or defecation until the jaw is unlocked and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce the dislocated jaws at a certain hour and they are not converted to their usual positions, then use hot fomentations and frequent baths, and frequently belch the patient's stomach, and frequently vomit the pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see that, know that it is a sign of death; and those who suffer from that will die in a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the sternum and its extremity.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The sternum is not dislocated from its connection with the chest; and some fractures are dislocated at the front, and this is called a sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And its restoration is that the patient bends over their own back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then apply a bandage to the wound with your hand with strong traction, so that it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place a poultice and powders on it and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	If the extremity of that which is bent and continues to be connected with it, is not dislocated on any day; then cover it as we have said and according to what you have.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And place a bandage on that poultice, and powders, and compression, and command the patient to remain quiet and at rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this medical treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its location.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the tip of the shoulder to the opposite side.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the part above the muscle, and this is done sharply; and it is not dislocated at the parts behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the parts in front of the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most commonly dislocated and deformed and pushed away from the parts behind the shoulder, especially in those where the flesh is thin, more easily than in those where there is much flesh, it is pushed out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And it often happens to some men that the muscle is injured by impact or fall, and it becomes infected with an abscess, and it is swollen because it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then carefully insert that into them, and then proceed with the treatment of them.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known as dislocation when the parts behind are deviant from their proper position; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because there are distinct differences between them; and at the head of the concave muscle, behind the deviant part, you should touch the head of the muscle as if with a hammer, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to its proper position, or move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you should press or move it, and then you should immediately distinguish between the normal and abnormal touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is called recent reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is when the assistant raises the hand of the patient above the deviant part; and then place your fingers behind the deviant part, and strengthen the joint in its proper position, and the assistant raises the hand of the patient, and extends it in the same way; and then place it back gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If it does not return, and since the beginning of the dislocation, for several days, the patient should be given a warm bath and administered a softening broth made with herbs such as rosemary, fenugreek, and melissa in water, and then administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then the patient should be placed on their back and supported by a pillow made of wool that is equal to the elevation and restriction, and the doctor should place their hand on the patient's temple, elevate the head of the muscle in virtue, and pull the hand of the patient so that it does not become numb at the parts behind, and another servant should hold the patient's head, so that it does not become numb at the parts behind, because at that moment it returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and stand on the side of the patient, and insert his muscle behind the pillow of the patient and elevate the pillow of the patient to the parts above until the patient is suspended in air, and another servant pulls the hand of the patient from the parts behind its belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the patient is heavy, then hold them up with an assistant, so that they do not aggravate the condition, because the dislocation may return soon.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it can be reduced alone by another method: place a long staff on the ground with a round shape, like a mortar, that is not too thick or thin, and place the patient's head on top of the staff; then cover the patient with a lion skin, and have the patient stand along the length of the staff, and extend your hand over their parts from the other side; and strengthen the joints of the other part, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce the joint for all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this cure: and you should take a staff of the length of two arms, and its width should be four fingers, and the thickness of the staff should be thin at the top of the handle in this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place a lion's mane cloth on the patient's head so that he does not descend into madness.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place your hand or arm under the patient's chin, extend it over the parts behind, and tie the patient's chest and arm to the support.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then place the arm on a ladder according to its height, extend the hand over the parts behind, and hang the other object from the other side, as the joint enters quickly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument of the patient is completed according to each possible method, and then cover the part under the chin with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; and apply prepared paste made of ground mold and album of egg over the entire muscle, as it is rolled up above, and then place strength behind the chin with a bandage; and the bandage should be rolled up over the paste, and the hand of the patient should be attached to the collar of the patient, and it should be left, and not be touched by the hand of the patient for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And the food of the patient should be placed on a table nearby, before the member is comforted, because it is more beneficial to their healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And the food should be given more frequently at 7 or 8 in the morning and some movement should be exercised; if it is stopped and not made flexible, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated by frequent moisture that has occurred to it or for some other reason, then it is necessary to apply a pointed cautery three times, according to what is said in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all of this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the plaster and bandage are reduced over it some moisture, and it is not bandaged, supported, or elevated, then know that the nerves of which are at the head of the muscle, have been cut or stretched or made flexible, and know that the joint will never be fixed in place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	When the dislocation is of the shoulder, elbow, or hand, reduction is done by impulse and extension at the joint, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And apply it to the other affected area, and cure it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If the healing process in the limb is slow and delayed in its movement, then the patient should use bandages that are moistened with warm water until the gravity is relieved and it returns to its original condition.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the cure of shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and also returns with difficulty; and if it is dislocated at all parts, and especially at the part where the arm meets the back, and the dislocation of the arm does not occur from the removal or from the touch according to some figure that is dislocated, and when you adjust the shoulder dislocated, it is clear that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	When you cover them and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible until the abscess is ready to burst, if you see the abscess ready to burst, reduction is difficult and often not healed at all; and more so when it is in the back parts, because it is worse than all the other species of dislocation, and causes more pain, and longer recovery from death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient should be extended towards the two sides, and the arm of the patient should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor should be on the back and behind the patient, and he should push the joint towards the palms of his hands evenly, or at the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in the back parts, then return as soon as possible by bending the hand towards the other hand, until it strikes the back at the root of the palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And two assistants should extend the arm, and two other assistants hold it in place to prevent it from moving during extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate the arm in all directions, as it is wrapped in a folded cloth on the patient's chest or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should apply some oil to it so that these causes help in lubricating the joint and facilitating its movement; and then gently push the joint back into place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of the fracture should be supported on that pad where there is stiffness and execution of the album of hooves, and it should be extended from the descending stricture, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be removed; and if the joint is formed in its place, then remove the bandage from it and leave it there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strong enough, then repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it there for a few days until it is extended; and then remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If an injury occurs near the joint during reduction, and the position of the joint is in movement, then apply moisture in baths and gentle friction, and compress it until it is relieved; or place a fat pad over the joint, and leave it on the affected part at night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then place that (the fat pad) in the bath; and when you remove it, apply gentle friction to the joint with cold friction, and repeat this over the affected part, a daily, second, and third time.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	with the bath water, until it is lukewarm.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place a wet and burned cowhide over that (the affected part), and apply some pressure on it; and do this several times, as that is moist and reduces it to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and the shoulder.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Sometimes the shoulder is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is difficult, and the opposite is true for other joints, but nevertheless, it is important to have speed in reducing the shoulder when it is dislocated, so that the joint does not become infected or something happens in the joint infection.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of this dislocation is that you place the patient's shoulder joint on a table and the assistant extends the patient's arm from that, and the doctor places his hand or palm on the edge of the joint, and pushes it back into its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it should be considered whether the palm is already on the patient's chest, then the patient places his back on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is on the other side of the arm, then the position of the arm of that should be intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand can be on the edge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, good; and if not, then press that arm so that the pus drains from it, and leave that; and do not repeat this, because otherwise, there is no way to reduce the shoulder without causing more damage.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	When the joint is second in its tortuosity; and the patient does not know any cause, but the muscle is softened and cannot bear any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then do not engage in it but strengthen it with a pointed cautery for the wound of which and strongly apply that to it.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then, when the wound is returned, place the bandage that we have recommended over it, and let it be left alone and strengthened for several days; and then remove it and let it be left alone and the muscle of which should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However, if the movement of which is obstructed and something heavy has occurred in it, then apply that with some warm water and some friction for a while until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the cure of the mentioned dislocations.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes these dislocations occur at all times.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of these dislocations occurs at the back of the hand or on the belly of which, then strengthen the dislocated part and push the dislocation towards the thumbs, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the said person, and suspend that devil's device to the part where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend that and extend it until it is equal to its own day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when the pain subsides, apply the second remedy according to that description, and do not cease to move it during the day and exercise it, and at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same thing if it is dislocated in the belly of the patient, and apply that to that part and do that first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do that when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the dorsal vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When something happens to one of the dorsal vertebrae or neck dislocation complete, and some other vertebrae from those places remain, in that case there is no cure, because death approaches the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	When that happens, it is the patient's will that their excretion is forced out, and they cannot hold it back; and if softening agents are applied to their members or their bed or their pillows or one of those, or if a sponge is placed in that place, then the softening agents are removed in four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then it is already in the parts behind and is not called diarrhea anymore.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The cure of that is that you should consider whether the diarrhea occurred due to pregnancy, because in that case it is not a cure for that nor a healing of that at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In that case, which occurs due to caresses or percussion or something similar to those, as the ancients said about the methods of cure in such prolonged speech, which most returns to profit; but I already have and have been improved from that from which few are excused from the too much of it, because of its proximity to the understanding of the matter, which he has exposed and formed with various instruments of that, which will show him and explain that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And say that in the case where the part of the body is affected in the chest, there is neither healing nor cure for that; and similarly in the one that is made at two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, none are cured except for the one that happens naturally in the back, which is what I would recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be extended on their face on a flat surface as close to the wall as possible, and then extended behind that, with a moist instrument so that it does not lie on their chest.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then place a straight stick under the patient's back, with their head on the ground at one end of the table near their head, and another stick in front of their feet at the other end of the table.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister should hold the stick, and not be stationary in a ditch; and another minister should hold the other one according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap the patient's head with a firm bandage, like a lion's mouth; and extend the end of the bandage to the stick that should be under their head, and tie it there; and then strengthen the other bandage on their ankles, below their legs, and support their abdomen; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick that should be under their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the assistant should extend the bandage to the part of the wound, and not leave the two wounds and the bandages of his places in which they were placed, but rather not stop there as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor should place his hands on the spine at the strongest part until he returns, or place one on a table, and then adjust his feet on the table until he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if he does not return by this method, then take a table with a width or length of three arms, and dig in the wall where we have said that it is proper for the patient to be in a place between the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the edge of the table on the spine, and the doctor should place his feet on the other end, and start to press until the spine is pressed and he returns to his place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the back that is rolled up around the body; and it is that you should be on the ground with the head of the patient in the back of the two thighs, the length of which should be an arm, and the head of the patient in the back of the other two thighs; and the length between each thigh should be a palm, and it has been done in each thigh where the back turns, and each one should be held fast on the ground so that it is not injured.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And have a soft cloth ready in which to place it, and rotate it between the two ends of the two poles.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a loop in which the cloth is formed, the length of which is one palm and a finger, and similar loops are made on the other two poles.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the bands that you have tied in the patient's chest in the loop that is to be placed on his head, and the bands that you have tied in the patient's thighs in the other loop are to be placed on his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each loop should be placed and a servant should twist it around his hand, and the doctor should tie it according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the loop:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the bone is returned and the wound is closed, then apply an ointment made of honey, and cover it; and place a cloth on top of the ointment that is about three fingers wide or slightly less than that, and the length of which is the quantity that filled the wound, and on the part of the bone.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then tie the bandage that we have mentioned, and use the patient as a source of subtle nourishment until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any imminence in the place at the end of the healing, then follow that medicines which moilifico and liniscan be administered for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is already administered in that place, the plaster of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some wounds occur in the back of the spine, and it is for that dislocation; and that bone which already immines for that reason, so that it does not happen that something is done to it because of this medicine, which would be very harmful to you.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not only end in dislocation, but also those that occur to those other joints with slight removal and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the wide is dislocated in four ways, which is dislocated at the parts inside, or at the parts forward, or at the parts down, or at the parts behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is mainly dislocated at the parts inside, and less often at the parts down or at the parts behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And when adjusting the cushion of the sick person to the healthy one, the length of the affected leg is longer and thinner than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee, but must lean on it, which is where the wound becomes infected with an abscess.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the less common cause of that which occurs is at the parts forward, because the injuries of that are opposite to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the less common cause of that which occurs is at the parts down, because the cushion on that side is extended according to the complement, but it does not bend towards the knee where the pain is, and if it is pierced to go out, it cannot be put back; and the urine of that is retained, and the swelling of that is infected, and you must place the bandage of that on the ankle.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And if the person to whom this dislocation has occurred cannot extend their elbow, nor can they bend the elbow of the other arm that is bent, and the cushion under them is shorter than the other, and the bent part is softened, and the head of the cushion is placed in that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of these species of this dislocation is that you consider, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been cured by having it near you, then administer reduction to it according to its arrangement, but not in that cure for all; and therefore do not expect that in that it be done hastily.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the one of whom the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should apply that which turns the joint and extends it to the parts behind and the parts in front, and to the right and left, for that which returns very well does not require another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	However, if it does not return in this manner, then you should expect that you prepare a strong cautery and extend the cushion of the part that is furthest away from the patient's elbow, or to the patient's hands, or to the bandage which is tied over the cushion above the elbow; and another minister extends the hand of that above in such a way that it supports the patient's hands behind the elbow; and then strongly hold the lion's tongue on the edge of the cushion, and have another minister clean the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if the extension is from the patient's arm to the armpit, or from the back to the shoulder blade.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if the extension is of all those in a single movement, so that the patient is raised to his own side and then lowered.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This particular type of extension is particularly common for all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary for every special case to direct the appropriate treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the patient's own dislocation, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts below, place the patient on his back; and place your hand on the rim of the cushion in that location where the head of the cushion and the location that is placed below meet; and extend the ligament from the armpit to the next part of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another assistant strongly grasps the patient's arms, and presses the large part of the patient's back and extends to the parts forward by strong extension, so that it returns to its own location.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this special case is one of the most difficult cures for which this member is reduced more than other cases.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	However, if you excuse yourself from this case and do not obey the entrance of this healing, then bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong, thick bandage, covering both the soles and the toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each should be four times the quantity, and the patient's bed should be extended more than the other by twice the quantity.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And the patient should be suspended over the top of the bed, and in the highest position; and the length of it from the ground should be twice the quantity of a cubit.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong young man to lift the cushion, and suspend it under the patient, and another young man to lift the other cushion, and the other young man to strengthen the support, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	However, in the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the front part of the shoulder, cover the patient with a blanket according to what we have recommended in the case of a frozen shoulder; and strengthen the bandage on the patient's bed properly and over their chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then bring two chairs for them to sit on, one at their feet and the other at their head; and adjust the chair at the side of the bed where the patient's body is covered with a blanket, so that the patient is not dampened by the chair being between their thighs, because you should extend the parts behind them without pulling.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister extends their part, and the doctor places their hand on the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you follow the reduction, it is generally good; and otherwise, place your hand carefully on that and have what we have said in the previous treatise for that purpose.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Make sure that the patient does not move their arms too much.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the parts behind, then make sure that the cushion is extended further, and follow this method according to the patient; and the doctor places the palm of their hand on the long axis of the patient's body, and another hand covers that, and the other hand covered with that extends to the parts behind at the part of the hollow.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the back parts, then do not let the patient be extended at the back parts, and lift them up on the ground; having made a hard cause underneath, as we have said about the bedding of the patient between two pillows; and place it on their face and extend the limbs, as we have said, without causing pain.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And let a compression bandage be applied to the part where the joint is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So when the reduction is completed as we have said, and the assistant of the reduction of the patient is not removed from you, and you extend two pillows under the patient, and when you see that those are equal and the patient extends one pillow and expands the other, then you know that the member has returned as we have said - and then you adjust two cushions and press and extend the bandage so that it is not too tight in any of the parts; and adhere to the patient for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then remove the bandage and apply it again, and place one cushion under one arm and another under the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see those joints in their correct position, then know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of softening, then return and apply that, and extend it according to its original structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then remove that, and make it walk in a wheelchair for as many days as necessary until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways, either it is dislocated forward, or backward, or to the sides more than to the back; and it is not dislocated downwards.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of the shoulder is that you order the patient to place his cushion on the ground; then know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all the patient's limbs is to place the patient upright, unless you have already extended their bed, then you can do so; hold your hand to the patient's face, and place their foot between your feet; and then make them hold their hand to your palms, and bring those between your hands over the patient's shoulder, and another minister extend their leg into the place where the patient's hand returns.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And if you have a bed that does not slip, then the patient's bed should be attached to the cushion and the elevated part of the bed.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply that plaster and make the bed stick to the cushion, and then tie those in place with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's bed for walking for several days, until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of the patient to you is excused, then in the treatment of the hand mentioned earlier, apply strong extension to the ligaments.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure of talipes equinovarus.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The talus sometimes becomes dislocated by small removal, and sometimes it is dislocated in the second complement, and the dislocation of it is made at the posterior or anterior parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the cause of the talus' dislocation is that sometimes it inflates and proceeds to the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The cure of the talus' dislocation is of great difficulty, and it is that it should be extended with ease to the hands and returned quickly.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In the cure of it when it is dislocated in the second complement, the patient should be placed on his right side, and hold that one a strong and skilled person from the posterior part behind his back.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then you should take your left hand on the most superior part of the foot, and your right hand on the part farthest from the foot in the position of the calf.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then draw the foot to your right hand, and hold it with two fingers, and extend your left hand; and press the sole of the foot towards the right side of the calf.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make two incisions according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then place the patient's chest on the cushion, and you are at the cavity.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, return in one incision or in two according to this method, and if the foot is even, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation, as it returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing it by that method, then place the patient on their back on the ground, and put a flat stone under them, and place a cloth between their thighs, and you have covered them with a cloth so that they do not become cold.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And the assistant of the patient holds their limbs, and another assistant extends the foot to their hands or to the cloth that lies on the back of the foot; and the assistant extends each according to the extension of their own part, and the stone is extended between the thighs of the patient, retaining that, so that the thing of the patient does not slip away from its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor approaches the dislocation with his hands, and another servant holds the clean cloth at the parts behind, so that the dislocation returns to its ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and you declare the patient's health from its reduction, then pause to apply a strong bandage, and bind the foot to the leg firmly.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful not to harm the nerves that are behind the talus, so that the bandage over that area is not too tight and does not hurt it strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it like that for two days or three; and if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And remove it on the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for fourteen days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to go that space, do not do so until the dislocation is fully dissolved and corrupted, and avoid that which does not require healing.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess occurs in that area, then be careful to administer in the cavity of that in which our narrative precedes, in another place of healing and embrocation, until it is re-opened.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter thirty-four.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the cure for the dislocation of those of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	That which is dislocated should be extended by a small amount of force; and this is not difficult, before it.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in the joints of the back of the foot, then cover the patient's foot on a level surface or on a table, and be present there with him.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then approach the patient's foot, and place your hand over the area where the joints are, and gently push against that, and wait until it returns to its original position and does not appear in the elevated position.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place a table under the patient's foot that holds the entire foot, with two lids, and gently strengthen that against the structure in a decent and firm way for three days; and then remove it and let him rest from ambulation for several days, until it is restored and assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter thirty-five.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the special types of dislocation that are caused by a fall or fracture or any other way.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occurs, and you perform the cure and restoration of that, then various complications may lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that reason, do not assume the cure of that, but rather the one that is known in the art, of long use, mercy and pity, late, not hasty or presumptuous; and that uses in the beginning of medicines that lead to abscesses only, and leave the patient to divine judgment, but to the one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, for relief from suffering, and in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore, try as soon as possible to bring it back to the beginning of the cause, giving that it leads to an abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as they want, then administer the regimen that leads to an abscess and heals the wound with the ointments that are suitable for it.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents occur in the bones of the spine, then perforate their skin, and do as we have said in the simple cases of that, in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid that which you have in the ways of fear according to what my preaching has preceded; for that is better for you to do to your Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and more salutary to your health than those which you will see in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	And end the words of Albucasis perfectly from which God may not be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
