Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	And now begins the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, if you have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for the completion of its purpose, and for its explanations, and for its declarations, it seems to me that I have completed what I promised to you in this treatise, which is part of surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The operation of castration was prohibited in our region and time, until the science of it was greatly unknown, and its existence was hidden; and no one practiced it except a few small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which were mostly errors and uncertainties until the understanding of it was closed and its length and art were extended.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I will live in the order of this treatise in the second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work, which is necessary for addition to the declaration, and for preparation of it.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	In ancient times, the reason why a skilled surgeon did not immediately know how to use their hand in this art of medicine was because the science of anatomy was long forgotten, and it was necessary to relearn it through the knowledge of the joints and forms of the members, and their conjunction and separation; and to understand the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their connection; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations of their exit.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And as Hippocrates said that a name is not important, but in the work itself, and especially in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already mentioned that person in the introduction of this book; because those who do not know what we have said about anatomy will not avoid errors that cause people to die, as I have seen too many of them, because they are formed in this science and obtain knowledge from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	I saw a doctor who was foolish and had incurred an abscess called carbuncle on the neck of a woman, and he incised some arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed into her body, which caused her to die among the most.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And another doctor saw that the dragon had swallowed a stone from a man who had died, and the stone was large, and it came to him and passed through his stomach, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I had already called for someone to remove it, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the position of the patient, I knew that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And another doctor took on the case of a duke from our land for surgery, and he was brought to a skilled blacksmith who was experienced in fractures; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he passed through the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and strong structures, and did not allow air to the wound.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he removed the splint according to his desires, and removed the bandage, and removed the dressing for several days and commanded that we remove the bandage; and at this point, the wound and the foot became infected, and it reached a dangerous point.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and I prepared to remove the bandage, and then he felt relief from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so I could not stop it, and I did not cease to walk with the patient until he recovered.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who pierced an abscess with cancer, and it became ulcerous in a few days, until the fire of his malice destroyed him.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the cranium is purged of melancholic humor, so it does not come to him from all iron, but rather that the member which suffers from all should be held.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for that reason, children, it is necessary for you to perform the operation in two stages: one in which health is associated with it, and another in which it is performed in the most favorable positions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already existed in all places where this book is found, in which the operation is performed in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard that and lay aside that one, so that the people do not approach you to dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your arms in care and protection of God, and your patients in success and stability.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best method by the grace of God for their salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay aside the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and keep your arms in that which causes you to fear, so that your perseverance in your faith and in your name will not be abandoned: because more remains to your glory, and further in the world and after to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	It has been said in some of these situations:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat a bad disease, because evil doctors will not be recognized.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already devised this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The beginning of the division of the book, and first of the first section.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter arranged in the form of the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the materials of cautery, and of that which is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and puncturing, and on wounds, and on sores, and on the extraction of splinters and similar objects from them, all chapters and ordered by the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of twisting and similar injuries to them; chapter ordered by the head within the foot, and by the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of pointed cautery and acute medicine and memory of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that, the treatise begins on all the free.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	That you know the quality of those points of that cautery and of its needles, and in what condition it is prohibited to use cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	So say that the speech of the quality of the point of cautery and of its needle of it is long and prolix, and subtle for knowledge, and secretly hidden; and from there to speak many people of secrets, and of those they are disagreed, and to me a little of their speeches, I fear extension.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And so it is said that the pointed cautery brings comfort to the entire universal composition, which is called matter or its matter, except for two compositions, which are tail compositions of matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the tail composition of matter, it is said that the pointed cautery is beneficial to it; others say the opposite, that the pointed cautery is not suitable for ailments that are caused by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is unsuitable for tail compositions of matter to be healed with heat.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who say the opposite, that by using the pointed cautery, it is beneficial in all tail compositions of matter that are found in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man and its moisture to the composition of fire, the body of a man is often injured.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the word of that one who has experimented with this at some times past.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But may not come over that one who has already been proven and practiced in the chapter of cautery by previous practice, and has known the diversity of the composition of men and the disposition of their illnesses in their members, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other body parts, do not fear for yourself, and especially in wet and humid diseases, where all doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree about the use of a pointed cautery in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Know, children, that the secret of healing by pointed cautery and fire is because fire is simple, its action reaching only the member being cauterized and not the other members unless they are nearby and slightly harmed.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of the pointed cautery reaches those in the members who are nearby, and it often brings relief to the sick member and is often used.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	The fire, due to its greatness and goodness of substance, does not do more than what is necessary, and we know this from experience and long study of the art over the truth of causes; and for this reason you should be excused from the length of this sermon. If it were not for this, your secret would have been hidden in this pause about the fire, and the quality of the operation of it in the body and its expulsion of diseases, which is a philosophical demonstration, would have been revealed to you.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And wisely, sons, know that they should be separated from the time in which it is most convenient to perform cauterization and pause at the best time of first daylight.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, because the time that is submerged in the juice of which the cauterizing instrument is made, and especially if it is for painful or necessary pains, quickly and strongly, the ones that do not suffer delay because of the fear of those who come with malice, which is greater than small harm entering through the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And do not catheterize in your feet, or, sons, that is only estimated by the common people and foolish doctors, because that evil which is cured by cauterization is not reduced all at once, and they pause that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as it is said above, because cauterization is not only in a place of medicine that alters the complexion and dries out the moisture, which are the causes of pain coming.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, excessive cauterization above the medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lordship.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the patient's illness returns in some hours of time, according to the complexity of the patient and the location of their illness, and the virtue of it, and that which is prepared in the body of the patient from the accumulation of superfluities in it, and that which is obtained by him in his acquisition of foods and similar causes; but if the disease in which it is administered cauterization is a subtle illness in a member of few superfluities and humidity, as with the tooth cautery for pain and similar causes, it is possible that in it does not return that pain, but rather something else is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And furthermore, common speech is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and correct speech is not to that which I understand in it, because they believe that there is no cure that profits from medicine or another cause that approaches cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and understanding that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is not but when administering the methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not confer, and at the end of the cause they administer such cauterization, and it profits at that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And here it is customarily understood that the pointed cautery is the second tool of medicine, not the understanding of which the common people and many foolish doctors are ignorant.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that gold cautery is better than iron cautery, and they did not say otherwise except for the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the location of cautery does not hurt, since it is not absolutely straight, because you already have some that heats and has some that does not heat at all, and gold cautery is good and better than iron cautery; however, when you make cautery with fire, do not say so, because it is prepared according to the quantity that you want by the roughness of the gold, and because it receives the cold; and if you adjust it on the fire, the gold melts for the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And because it is made with iron cautery, you must make it slightly and more properly in the direction of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on the second chapter of the cautery, and have ordered those between the feet, so that they may ask him what he wants from there.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of the cautery for head pain caused by cold and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers the moisture and cold that are the main causes of this accident, which is called gout, from the head to the parts of the joints and fingers fluent, and many of sleep, and pain in the teeth and jaw, and universally of all evil that comes from cold, such as paralysis, suddenness, apoplexy, and similarities in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: first command the patient to take laxative medicine to cleanse his head for three or four nights, according to the patient's condition and age.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then do this action between your hands on a low stool, and place your hand over his chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place your thumb on the surface of the nose, between his nostrils.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when the area you mentioned is reached, mark that spot and then remove the pointed cautery, which has the following shape:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that on the spot well and gently, so that it does not press too tightly at once, and you rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then slightly lift your hand and look at the spot, and if you see that some of the bone has been exposed, as much as the amount of gravel, then lift your hand, and if it does not return to its place, bring your hand back to that iron, or another one of those, if it is cold, before it is seen from the bone what I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve that on the spot and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place a soft cloth on that spot and leave it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the area with the quadruple medicine before it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that when the plague is opened, as much pain gets to the arm, so it is better and more useful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say that one should cauterize the neck through the bone, and hold the cautery until some part of the bone is stuck together.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove that which is stuck to the bone, and then cure it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cautery should reach the back, before it penetrates the bone strongly enough to break the bone, and this is the way to make a small incision:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate that from that place the fumes of the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And it should be kept open for a long time, and then cured before it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these two kinds of cautery in all people, only in those who are secondarily afraid; and if you leave that one, I advise you, it is better to save the head when it is possible, because the head is developed by the solution of continuity of which there is evidence in other members, and more so when the head of the patient is naturally free.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better for me, and from that one and the other work, it saves health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When there is constant and long pain in the whole head, and it is prolonged in the patient, and they use garlics, and hooks, and capipurges, and ointments, and guatz, and cadels, and gualinas, and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a certain cauterizer that does not help at all, then consider this: if the head of the patient is naturally very strong; and not easily broken, then use another cauterizer.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that on the top of their head with a certain cauterizer when the crown is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the crown and expose the bone as much as we have found and cauterize that with a certain cauterizer in the part behind the head in the place called the fontanelle, — and that is the place where the cushion is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And let your hand rest on the bone, and do not expose it, because the patient will suffer great pain different from the pain of all other cautery heads of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I would say that this cautery is in the place, because it covers the part of the head that is cauteryed with the toes of the foot and the occipital region is a more subtle cautery than the one that cauterizes the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the ancient cauterying of the eyebrow.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the pain in the part of the head is very intense, or if it extends to the temple, remove the medicines that are applied to the head and administer the other cure, which I have mentioned in the chapters on diseases; and in no case should this cauterization be done with an acute cautery or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But if you use a cautery that is burning, then take a hollow reed and scrape it and apply the ends of it to the parts where the other cautery heads are.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then approach the location of the pain with a curved blade inserted into the wound that is in its place behind the skin, until it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply pressure to the stopped area with a tight bandage, and leave it for three hours; and then remove the dressing and treat the wound for two or three days, and then apply a poultice over the affected area where the wound is located.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that one until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do that with some burning medicines which I have written about in the other treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The cauterization is done in this way: ignite with the following method:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a clover-like cautery, where the head of it is like a crocus flower in which there is some curvature, and at the middle of it is a small hollow.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand over the location of the pain, and remove your hand — so that the skin is not stuck to the area which has been left — and rotate the small iron at speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of blood that is stuck due to the thickness of the cord is such that it covers the entire body, and lift your hand to prevent the artery from being stuck, so that no bleeding occurs.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a salted water dressing on that area and place it over the wound for three days; then apply a healing ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cauterize the end of the knife according to the cautery, and be careful not to cut the artery in this manner.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cauterization of an ancient wound.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an ancient wound with the cure we mentioned in the previous chapter and the cure we mentioned in the divisions of illnesses, and if you do not improve the cure, and see that the illness does not respond to the first cauterization with medicine or the cauterization with fire, then wait until the cauterization is healed, because it means that there is a line of long bones underneath the pain area or where that is; and place your hand over it and push it until you reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is damaged by chewing, and that the muscle not be stuck and the nerve that causes it, and that it does not become spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the guard and care of the flow of blood from the artery that is being punctured, where in the puncture of it there is fear, and more so for those who do not know what it is and are not studied or skilled; and leave the operation in it at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find the memory of the rule for the flow of blood from the artery according to its method, in its own location in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this disease that does not allow this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize it at the middle location of the head as we have reported, and cure the wound before it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you apply the cautery that we have said in the chapter of stretching of the artery with a two-pronged cautery, and this cauterization is better and more suitable.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cauterization of gout pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the big toe due to cold and it is cured by removing the causes or the other cure mentioned in the previous section, and the pain does not return, then apply the cautery, and this is the one that has no point, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then approach the point to the heat of the cautery, and place it around the entire big toe as if it were rotated, or in the circuit of each one if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	With the cautery, carefully approach the edge of the big toe little by little until you have reached the place without harming the area.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of the point is in the entire big toe, and you have reached it, then quickly treat the places until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of the cauterization of torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture, which is cured and can only be treated by the specific means that come from flexion, as we have said in the sections of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the affected area due to dryness or spasms of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that area of torture with jerras and capipurgi and guarguarismes, and do not compare your treatment, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first from the golden needle, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your hand on the opposite side of the affected area, as softening only occurs in the healthy part.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The form of cauterization is that you cauterize that area with the cauteri in the right side of the golden needle, a little above the corn on the cap, and in the temple another, the longest of which should be second to the length of the said point, and place your hand over the cauteri until the quantity of the majority of the species of the codex is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cauteri, and it is specific to the cutellari, the form of which is given in the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	May it be remembered that there is a certain remedy for this; and cover the affected area with a cloth to prevent excessive waste.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then care for the affected area with the remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the ancient cauterization of apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and is treated with the remedy we have mentioned, and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize that area with four cautery irons: over all the bones of the head; and with the cautery iron, on the temple, as we have said; and with the cautery iron in the groin.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of using the cautery is done as described above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is deeper; and then care for the affected area with the remedy as it progresses.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of the cauterization of memory loss caused by a blow.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Gave large and round pills to the patient at the beginning of the treatment.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then remove the entire cap from the patient and place it on the area described in this treatise about plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And then place some cold compresses, which are made of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Do the same as the previous method that was mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if those remedies are effective; and if not, then make three pointed cautery marks on the back part of his head, which should be placed from the most inner part of the head to the most outer part of the head.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place the largest amount of the mentioned plaster between each cautery, and then care for the cautery as it is proceeding.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you feel more pain and the patient is able to bear it, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you feel greater pain, then make the cautery on both feet.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And care for that until it is healed; and let the cautery be made of olive oil according to the form given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter Nine
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cautery of the perineum and softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	You have already processed in the softening of the head and that we have said; and then remove the patient's head, and then cauterize with that cautery at the middle location of the head, and cauterize over all the corners of the head, and cauterize over the back part of it, and three cauteries on the spine of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the patient's softening of the body of those and the tolerable patients and the illness is strong, then cauterize with that cautery over four cauteries on the spine of the back, and afterwards cauterize into where is a little bit of the neck of it, and raise the tieua hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then care for that until it is healed, and this is cautery oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter Ten
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cautery of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized but that epilepsy is by fluctuation.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And so, at the beginning of the patient's illness, you should modify their brain with the other treatment that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and tolerant to the exception of medications.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate medications, then administer garlic and mustard to the servant who modifies them, giving them this for several days, with good nutrition.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the patient's head, and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of their head according to the previous method, and with another cautery at the back of their head, and over each hair on their head, cauterize it.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that area with cautery as I have mentioned, having paralysis and softness of the body over the spines of the neck and the spines of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And if the cauterization is done with oil as previously mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then pause the cautery subtly according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and become wet and thick, then cauterize those parts with the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and tends towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is wet, then give him to drink that which purifies his brain according to the water that has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and make a circular incision carefully on his head, and place a bandage in that location.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be lying down, and held from all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply the liniment; and it is more suitable for an ancient sheep's bladder.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that on the fire to warm up, which the patient says relieves his suffering when it is in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then apply that in the middle location of his head in the circle, and let it enter him before it is mixed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And give that patient all the medicine in the week, or according to another regimen until they are healed; or if you want, make small points on the most affected part with a pointed cautery, but hold your hand with a cautery ready: this is a special cauterizing tool that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And place your hand on that swollen part in wheat flour or in grayish-white flour.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of the descent of water on the back.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared to you that the beginning of water on the back occurs through the senses that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give that patient the water that melts the head of him, and keep that from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that patient sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command that patient to shake their head, and make small points on the middle of the head with a pointed cautery; and then make small points on two temples if it is the beginning of water in two backs, or on one latz if it is the beginning of water in one back.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut all the veins and tendons that are located behind the ankle; and place the cautery in that far location on the side of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see any bleeding from there, apply some medicine that is at your disposal.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you should know the skill of extracting tendons and treating those abscesses and preventing blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some cautery is applied to the neck behind two bones and between two other cautery.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the forehead are very old and through the veins and arteries that are in that location manifest of the cap and it is verified that this is superfluous and flexible, then cauterize that with the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on beginning of water in the forehead, and with the cautery in the middle of the head and with two cautery in the neck behind two temples, and with two cautery in the neck behind two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If it is necessary to cauterize the vein on the side of the head above the temple with a small cautery, then do so in all length of the vein.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	About the cauterization of the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat the patient with the remedy that we mentioned in the division and have not yet completed your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient three spoons of honey; then remove the cap from their head, and cauterize the vein with a small cautery or olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize the vein with a clove cautery or two small cauteries on both temples, just behind the hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the arch that you do not burn it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the shape of the clove cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	About the cauterization of the eyelids to soften them.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a small cautery or this crescent-shaped cautery; and this is its shape:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you apply a small pointed cautery between the two eyebrows and extend it to both temples, it will relieve the pain.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	The length of each cautery should be according to the thickness of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press your hand too hard on the cautery, but according to the thickness of the eyelid that is stuck together.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the eyelid cautery when the eyelashes are converted to the parts and poke the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the eyelashes of the eyelid are converted to the parts and poke the eye, apply cautery in those places according to two methods, either by burning or by medical cautery.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you apply cautery by fire, order the patient to look at those lashes that are like those that are cleaned, until they are extended and equal; and if he pushes that devil, then strengthen the eyelids of the eye with one bandage so that it is not deformed until the eyelashes have grown.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When they are born and circumcised, pause the patient's head on your thigh, and then place your hand over their eyelid, feeling for the second bone of the finger, which should be near the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place a soft cloth or moist cotton on their eyelid.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then remove the cauterizing tool that was used for this purpose.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize the area that was felt, little by little, in spiral motions, until the surface of the skin is burned completely, appearing as a blister, all properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And when the healing of the wound is complete, the eyelid should be contracted and the eyelashes of the eye should be elevated to avoid the puncture of the eyelid.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place your hand over the cloth until the scab is formed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If the pain returns through the nerves for some reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another cut with the cautery over that area as you had done previously.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the nerves are inside the eyelid, then cauterize that area where it is lifted to its natural position and equalized, so that the nerves do not poke out.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	If the cautery burns this area, command the patient to lift the nerves through which it is prolonged and equalized, and then make a shape of paper or cloth like a bandage of myrtle.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take some known and living worms, and if you do not know how to do that, and mix those causes with bread, and make a poultice of that so that it is not dispersed; and then spread that over the paper that was made there with the shape of a myrtle bandage, and place that over the affected area; and place the head of the patient in the upright position on a pillow, and the cap of the patient should be on his head.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the medicine on the patient's back and press it gently, so that the patient does not feel the sting of the medicine, which is like a burn from fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And if the sting continues, then remove the medicine and wipe the patient's back with a cloth; when the sting ceases, return the medicine and wash the affected area with clean water; and then consider whether the eyelid has been raised as it was during the operation, because it is now healed; and if not, return to the previous step of applying the medicine to the area where it did not sting and was not denigrated before being fully healed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place the patient's head on a pillow until the phlegm of the inflammation is expelled, and then cure it with a poultice of linseed oil or another remedy until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to keep constant vigilance during the operation that no medicine falls out of the wound, and if the eyelid becomes soft and there is any cause of hairs in the wound, then repeat the medicine on the area where the eyelid becomes soft, as you did at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the method of midwifery.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the bones of men are varied according to their size and strength, and therefore your contraction is made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	Do not hide the right path to him who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of the cautery for a fistula that is in the lacrimal canal of the bone.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula, do not confuse your treatment with what we have said in the divisions of diseases, but rather cauterize it in this way: order the patient to place their head on your knee, and hold their head between your hands in such a way that it is neither too high nor too low.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a cotton pad soaked in warm water or in a poultice of poppy seeds on the bone of your hand.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	the one that is hollow, like a hollow or pen nib of a quill, at one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you see, it should enter into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to come out with a probe.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But the one that is concave is better for the work of the toe.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the opened abscess, and treat it with salt and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then open it and remove the pus from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place your hand over the area where the cautery is burning hot, and hold the toe with a small towel from the wrist to the tip of the toe, so that your hand or the patient is not burned, and then remove the cautery from the gray matter and corrupt it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of the toe the cautery goes into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and let that be there for three days, and then place your hand over that area and apply a dry poultice until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If they have passed several days without being healed, then pause the acute corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered and scraped according to what is appropriate in its capital.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula: place the cautery in the location of the fistula and make a small incision in that fissure, which is the shape of the fistula; then insert the amount of one uncia of lead into it; and with your hand, make a good retention, and do not let the patient be harmed by the lead, so that the lead does not reach the depth of that; and cover that with album of egg or water, where the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cauterization and the cure, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a truss of nasal and reduce the fistula to the nose's body when it comes to its proper location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the Cautery of the Wound in the Foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Vesicles often cause fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you cure those fissures with the remedy that we have mentioned in the divisions and do not expose your cure, then ignite the small cautery of this form that is as follows:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And place it according to the thinness of the spoon.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place your finger carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it with wax until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the Cautery of Fistulas in the Mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth, an abscess forms and swells, and then bursts, and then becomes old, and then bleeds and is made into a fistula, and then you cure it without exposing your cure, then heat the cautery according to the quantity that is required for the fistula, and place that heated in the throat of the fistula, and then your hand inside until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and then make a small wound or two; and then heal it with the remedy that we have mentioned for the cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the sin is excised and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and treat the rotten bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cauterization of teeth and the softening of jaws.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the jaws are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, treat those with medicines and do not trust, then place the patient's head on your thigh, and hold the cauterizer in the form that will come in shape, so that you do not touch the tongue with it. Then put a small piece of cloth over the tooth and insert it into the jaw, heating the cauterizer strongly until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the level of the tooth to be reached.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and repeat the cauterizer several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient holds their mouth open with salt water and hold it for an hour, and you can see that the decayed tooth is closed, the softened jaw is strengthened, and the moisture corrupted is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	About the cauterization of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or there is ice or worms in it, and the medicine does not help, then cauterization can be done in two ways: with a cautery of cow's horn, or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	With a cautery of cow's horn, you take the horn and fill it with iron in the shape of a bullet, then take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the tent, and put the cautery of cow's horn into it, and place it on the painful tooth quickly before it freezes.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you want, immerse wool or cloth in the cautery of cow's horn above, and place it on the painful tooth, and place another over that iron ignited until the iron reaches the top of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	May the cauterization be done with a hot iron or fire, and if there is any resistance from the patient, and the heat of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then ignite the cauterizing iron in the shape that will come, and place that on the tooth, and your hand inside to prevent the iron from being broken; and do this several times so that the pain remains or on that day or on the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And cover that because of the pressure of that cauterizing iron that the patient opens their mouth wide and hold it for an hour, and then remove it; this is the shape of the cauterizing iron.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as much as you can extend your hand.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cauterization of hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are of the flaccid type and are caused by humors, and they are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you want to help them to be digested slightly, then ignite the cauterizing iron in the shape that is this: having two extremities so that the smoke from the cauterizing iron can escape through the other extremity, and place that on the abscess a few times, and if necessary for that, until it reaches the front of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, then apply the cauterizer according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it for three days, then place it on the side infused with boiling water until it has been burned by the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that wound and dress it with bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the needle or cautery used in this way is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of the cautery for the treatment of warts and the construction of a leech.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes over the anal opening of the lung, and especially when it is more so with coldness, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then apply the cauterizer to the root of the tail in that place.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to apply the cauterizer to the tail or burn the skin of the patient, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And apply the other cautery to the joint of the neck in the lower spine of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery for him should be sharp as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that which was previously inserted until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cauterization of a sick lung and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, the patient does not have fever or tumor, and it is an old illness, then cauterize that part with two cautery needles on the furcula in the locations of the leontz and buoyt; and another cautery needle in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and let the cautery be sharp as before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery called a puncta, the shape of which is described in the punctation of tinea.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let your points enter those; and then care for that which was previously inserted until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cautery should have three prongs for cauterization, like this:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	About the cautery of the nipple, which is a useful aid.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the position of the aid is dislocated due to moist lubricants and not stopped in its return time, it should be returned before it returns to that usual position, and with a slight movement it can be moved as needed, as we have testified, therefore first reduce the dislocation, and then place the patient on their back or on their side; and raise the elbow which is in the part of the nipple to the parts above the left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the part of the nipple.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then remove the cautery which has two ends; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the elbow as it penetrates from one side to the other; and the figure of the cauterization will be shown here with four cautery ends.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And that subtle second according to the amount of threads; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Some of these methods are adjusted according to this count and because they are the cautery.viii.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place your hand over the cautery for a while with warm salt, and then make the patient comfortable and not in pain for some time until they are comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and has been done, then cauterize over the muscle with a clavilh or pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is moisture and humidity in the stomach that has not been removed from its composition and multiplied many times, and if you continue with the methods of treatment and do not confirm, then the patient should be laid on their back, and their arms extended, and then cauterize with three cautery: one cautery under the chest for the length of a clavilh cautery, and two cautery under the ribs of the cautery, forming a triangular figure; and stretch out those that are not adjusted to prevent them from being damaged.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery corresponds to the thickness of the two tires of the carriage.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if the shape of the cautery is like this, then use a large cautery in the middle of the stomach in this form; and this is a cautery in the form of a circle in this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach is cauterized at the point where this cautery frightens it: and you should place your hand on the stomach point according to the quantity that you want to test, and then cauterize those points with this cautery; and then cure them with the remedy that is preceded before they are healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cauterization of the foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the foot occurs due to cold or moisture or heavy wind before its normal composition is disturbed by excessive discharge, and it is cured with the remedy that we have said and not otherwise, then let the patient lie on their back, and place your hand on the foot, and test three cauteries in this form and this quantity on the foot below the ribs, where the human body lies.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery should be according to the largest part of the aforementioned, and the cautery should be according to the length of the body straightened.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not understand the reason for the pointed cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of that which is attached to the quantity of the bottom of the codex is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet, then let him sit down, who has already extended his limbs, and raised his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these pointed cautery with a pointed cautery, when there is your subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the bottom of the codex be attached for all the body and reach into the intestines, where the codex is thin; and know that.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of puncturing an abscess on the thigh with a pointed cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When the swelling or abscess on the thigh is ended and you want to know if that abscess is in the meat of the thigh or in its membrane, then if it is in the meat of the thigh, the patient's weight and pain are increased.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the membrane of the thigh, then the pain is greatly increased and often fatigues doctors with its treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, turn the patient on their side; and then feel the location of the abscess and try to puncture it; and then ignite the cautery that is shaped like a needle, the form of which has been described in the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And burn it with that and cautery until all the sinew is coagulated, until it reaches the bone, until it penetrates the bone.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that by the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cautery except that of which the study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in which many bad outcomes have been known; rather, this experiment has been done on this operation, but it is better to leave it to those who know better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of plantar warts.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauterization method of the warts on the feet, according to this manner, is to take a long dry bark from aristology, a sharp pointed bark that can be found, and it should be of the largest size.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and place it in the fire, and cauterize with a cauterizer in that location which is between the continuity of the scapula and the neck; and with two small cauterizers placed side by side, one declining slightly towards the part that was left by the beard, and two more cauterizers in that place where they decline between the fifth rib and the lumbar region, declining slightly towards the back; and another cauterizer on the chest; and three cauterizers on the parts of the back; and another cauterizer in that location which is between the two scapulas, and two more cauterizers on the sides of the chest, after the one that is between the two scapulas.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover your hand with the pointed cautery, but keep it in the open air of the work area.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And the ancient authorities say that the men who use pointed cautery-like irons similar to a ray and ignite them, then place them in the location between the ribs, until they reach the other apostema and it is removed, as we have said about the pustule of the finger.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this perforation, do not be afraid of the pointed cautery, because it has often happened in the location of the fistula that does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the mouth.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the mouth of the patient, do not compare your cure with what we have said about the division, but instead cauterize it in three ways, all of which are corrective, one of which is to make three or four cautery marks along the length of the mouth according to the shape of the cautery of the finger, whose figure has been given.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery, have the thickness of a pen or slightly more, and the handle of the cautery should be the same as the handle we mentioned in the foot cautery equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not place your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be on their side.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery having two tines, which we mentioned in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the suture that is at the end of the hamstring, which is causing the pain of the patient's left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be the one that lifts the suture according to the length of the body, so that the points can be made according to the latitude of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two tines, light one, in that moment when those penetrate the suture of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus four points are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with the cautery having three tines.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you should cure the pointed cautery so that it does not cause pain for too many days, as it is more common than other previous causes of cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cauterization of hydrocele.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Do not use a pointed cautery in hydrocele, but rather a proper one.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure the hydrocele, follow the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment, then cover that person with four cautery needles around the navel and one cautery on their stomach, and another cautery on their chest, and another cautery on their back, and two cautery needles between their ribs, and one cautery in the right side of their chest, and another cautery on their stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery in place so that it does not cause pain for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the pointed cautery that heals quickly so that they can be joined to each other, and served with quick aid for recovery.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the pointed cautery that is cauterized on the belly should be according to its previous form, and the one that is cauterized on the back should be according to its previous shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cauterization of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with hydrocele and filled with water sitrina, cautiously cauterize the feet on the back of the foot, in no contact with that which is between the ear and the ring, and raise your hand above the cauterizer and do not turn it; and then raise your hand, and do not return to that, because the water sitrina drains.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	And the cauterizer should be made in this form: And then make two cauterizers on each thigh, and in each thigh make a cauterizer at the end of the cauterizer's edge.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be as long as the cushion: and place one end of it under the patient's body, and the other at the bottom of the cushion; and over each cushion, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time so that some water can run out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And cure those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of the cauterization of wounds in the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When wounds in the abdomen are caused by cold and humidity that penetrate deeply, these are digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines, and are cured with certain methods of treatment and not with confereys, and sometimes the sick suffer from a powerful cauterization, then cauterize it with a large cauterization on their stomach according to what was previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauteri of the circle and with four cauteries in the circular belt of the subtle abdomen, with the subtle clavilh cauteri; and with the cauteri on the alcatin over aloes, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If you see the abundant humidity and the patient is tolerating it, then cauterize that over the perineum and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cautery devices over the stomach and near the groins, as this cures the condition greatly.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34:
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in their natural state of ancient hemorrhoids or one of thick humors that have infiltrated or corrupted by moisture, and they are cured with the method we mentioned in the division and do not differ from the correct cure, then cauterize with three cautery devices over the small of the back and a little triangular, and with another cautery device above the belly.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it is determined that the stomach of the patient is infiltrated and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is swollen, then cauterize that over the stomach with a large cautery device as previously mentioned; and with one cautery device on the ribs, and with another cautery device on the sore of the patient with a clavilh cautery, and lay the cautery aside for some time, and then cure the patient before they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of tumors near their abscessions.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you incise a tumor, then use a cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that lit cautery into the incised tumor, and immediately place your hand over the area until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the pus comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, if the abscessions are too large, then cauterize each one after you have found them, and immediately apply a poultice made of what you have given to them from the ointment until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery over something, it is better to do so in a quiet manner.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in nature between the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in their place, and the patient is frightened by this, then heal with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When someone has an abscess in the natural cavity behind, and it is old and infected, remove the pus and corrupt humors from it, and then apply a subtle probe to the depth of the abscess, and know the quantity of its depth.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then apply a cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that lit cautery into this abscess, according to the quantity in which the probe entered.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat that process with the cautery every few days or three, according to your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful of burning nerves and veins; or if the abscess is near the bladder or intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not do that unless the abscess is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And heal the place where it was healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and the matter has been removed from it, and it has been there for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the matters are not left in place, then know that they are penetrating into the bones and corrupting them, or that is one of those causes from which remembrance will come to their place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter thirty-seven.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of the sinuses.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain in the sinuses occurs due to cold or heavy congestion, and the patient's breath is impeded, then know that you should cauterize each sinus with a pointed cautery, using a needle for remembrance.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And if you cauterize too much, then do it a little less, so that three lines of cauterization will come, and they will be more effective in relief.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter thirty-eight.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder is weakened and softened due to cold and moisture, so that the patient cannot hold the urine, then know that you should cauterize it in the upper part of the bladder, using a pointed cautery, and cauterize with another cautery in the middle and on the other side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the foot; and cauterize that pointed cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the nails should be cut according to the process.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cauterization of the mother.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is a bruise and wetness in the mother, and it is prohibited to press on her, and her menstruation is corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and she experiences pain from their presence, then have that place cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a pointed cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let the nails be cut.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of cauterization of the dislocation of the arm.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture is infiltrated into the part of the arm, and it causes swelling at its location, and it is stretched over the other when they are compared to each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is often in the area where the pain is felt.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should cauterize the patient with a pointed cautery in a similar way as before, as you have not yet felt enough to test the circle of the wound with its rotation, and so that the wound falls into the correct location of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery should have the same shape as the one used in stomach cauterization.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not present, then use three pointed cauteries or an olive oil cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the cautery should be applied according to the thickness of the entire wound; and then care should be taken until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain is felt in the area where the vein is located, and its cause is drying and moisture, the patient should be treated with the remedy we have mentioned and not given, and this remedy is antiquated, then you should lacerate the patient with large humors from foul or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the handle of the cautery in that case has two types: a medical cautery with a burning tip, or a fire cautery.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	And the second type of cautery is known as one that cauterizes that part of the leg with three triangular-shaped cautery tips, and it is done at a good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery is the thickness of the tip, and if the cautery is olive or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes the cautery is placed on the opposite side of the leg to make it four cautery tips.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want to, cauterize around the circle that precedes the form in the dislocation of the leg, and it should contain and burn the entire skin.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery in cases where pain is adherent to the leg and does not extend into the space.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it extends into the space, then cauterize that part with two cautery tips on the space over the location where the patient's pain is; and with one cautery on the spine for a few moments on the left side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the pointed cautery, and the depth of the cautery according to the thickness of the skin.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient complains that the pain is spreading to the area of the feet, then cauterize this area with three or four or more points if necessary from that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient complains that the pain is on the back of the leg, then cauterize this area with a pointed cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful during cauterization that the cautery does not burn the nerves or great arteries, and that for this reason it causes harm to the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have also seen others of those who cauterize on the scalp and burn in the cauterization, and the bed is inflamed before the tumor is achieved, and fire pierces and corrupts the whole foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then apply that.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each one in this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise men say about the use of any cauterizing tool, like this one: make it similar to a circle of iron, the circumference of which should be the width of a palm; and its opening should be according to the thickness of a date pit or a small nut.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let that circle have another third part; and the spaces between them should be equal to the thickness of a nut; and those circles should be inserted from two sides; and the length of those iron strips should be one nut or two nuts, and make them neatly arranged in the circles; and this is the shape of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then let it be heated in the fire until it glows and gives off sparks, and then let it be placed on the part of the patient, the patient lying on their back.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that point with three burns in a row.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; apply ointment to that point and leave the wound covered for several days; and then care for that point until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Fathers Albucasis: Oh sons, of this kind of cauteries we have not used much because of the fear of its danger to the patient, and because we have found some that are dangerous for the patient.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Of the burns that the patient suffers, and at once put it on the place of the patient.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Put the burns on the medicines that are adhesive so that you make two circles with an armula perforated in which thus the wound of the door of iron; its length in the naughtiness of their is two nuts or those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between which the quantity of the greatness of the said; and its opened from below and above, and its contained between them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand on the part of the water that the patient is on the left side, and put your hand on the part of the water; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of which is like a small fire little by little, and you let it be for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the bite and the adhesion of it — that those bites are like from fire — until the bite stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away all the water from the area around the wound with clean water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave it alone for three days and place your hand over that border where the black discharge of the inflammation remains, and leave it like that for several days, and then remove it; this is the best method.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain spreads to the thigh or leg, place it in the position that contains water according to what is done in the water equally.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the method of water dressing, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and unextinguished charcoal from a broken piece of one, and place it in a new layer of the kind that the broken part has been perforated by a small tube according to the amount that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place it in another layer of boiling water, and pour over that alkali and live charcoal with clean water the kind that takes those by a certain amount, and as soon as you understand that they are well compressed, leave the layer that remains from the boiling water on the broken part to the boiling layer.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all of that water, and pour it over another living cause and another renewed alkali, which is very strong acid, which is administered in certain medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, which operation is like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some medicines are cauterized with them, such as thyme and honey and other causes that are mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Galen recorded from an ancient man the operation and cure of which was cured pain in the bladder and sciatica, and magnified that it should be of that, and said that there is no need for other cure, and that it is healed by a method such as recommendation, which is very strong and has already been of that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be of certain green herbs, and if it is not fresh, it should be taken from a fresh fig; and the mot should be crushed with a small amount of gray and placed on the water in which the pain is, or on the cushion, or on the chest, and tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it remain for a period of three hours or until the patient has an episode of diarrhea.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then apply that to the bottom, and when the body of the patient is twisted, insert it into the ground, where the pain ceases and is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that no one should use this cauterization for these remedies, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	It is said that when the goat's wound is cauterized with a vein, it should be applied to its back; and this cauterization should be made in this manner: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the patient's foot and the bed.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat's wound and apply it to the fire until it is burned into charcoal; and place it on the wool and leave it there until it is stretched out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat that, and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the whole body and the pain stops.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the cow's horn cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the cautery for two pains.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes joint pain occurs in the feet due to various causes, such as from impact or from excessive excretion, and from similar causes, due to the infiltration of wet and moist matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is not used in this single case, which is made for the outflow of wet and moist matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, before evacuating the patient's intestines, give them bitter and similar pills to those that are made on the feet where the pain is three lines wide, more than what is usually tried with a cautery, according to the tolerance of the patient and the effectiveness of the pills.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And this cauterization is made with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three or four pointed cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of cautery at the beginning of a fever.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Mots are said to this illness in the small children; and it is from the beginning of it that they occur in the children on their structure in the lower part of the leg, the elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And later on the posterior spine of the back and the neck of it that begins to overcome the other spines.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to prevent it, then do so with that pointed cautery that is circular according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery over all part of the spine equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cautery in the circuit of the spine with the pointed cautery two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And those points are placed between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then heal the place before it is healed by what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that cautery is not administered in a fever that is caused by spasm of the nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Chapter 44. On the Cautery for Gout and Joint Pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And since gout is cured by the hand of the healer and not completely relieved from pain, then use the pointed cautery again.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you should apply the pointed cautery near the joint of the foot with a little bit of heat.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain spreads to other joints or to other parts of the body, and it does not subside, then use three or four pointed cauteries on each knuckle with this pointed cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you have other cautery tools that are necessary for this, then use them, but do not put too much pressure on your hand with the cautery before, only as much as is necessary for the size of the wound.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain reaches both sides of the body, then administer the cautery that we mentioned in its previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the chest and is called pleurisy, then prick in the circle of the ribs as they revolve, prick in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in those places, then prick in the circle of the ribs over each rib and on the pinch of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain reaches close to the joints or muscles, then cauterize all the tendons of each part of the assistants.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient from good care and reception of medicines, because if good care is given and the feces are evacuated, this cautery will heal, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of Cauterization of Wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the wound is in the joints and the intestines are protruding through the abdomen, and this begins to happen, then tell the patient to lie on their side and use a soft cushion so that the wound does not come out of their belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then place the patient between your hands on their side, and command them to hold their breath until the hole is made or the intestines appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that one to the position of the patient, and place the needle on the thigh bone, and hold it so that its end resembles a circle at the top of the thigh.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then light the cautery with this shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is red and hot.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place your hand over the cautery with your right hand, and insert the needle into the tendon of the pentenilh at the midpoint; and repeat that other technique if you have not succeeded in the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe the position of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn it, as it could come out of the patient and cause great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Know that when you have the needle, do not press on the bone, as it will not allow your operation to proceed.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And know that the needle for children should be thin according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then care for the location of the cautery for three days, until the scar of the fire has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the other wounds until they have healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should lie on their back for 40 days before the wound is sealed and the pain subsides.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And make sure that the patient's nutrition is provided according to the duration of their treatment, which will help flatten their stomach, and prevent the intestine from coming out due to the effort to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to get up after 40 days, then administer adequate medication, and keep that for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And be careful of hard work and replenishing food and drink, and of violent vomiting, because when using this healing regimen, the whole body will be cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I direct the cure of the ruptures in the other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, and you want that they do not bleed, then cauterize the rupture with that same pointed cautery according to the amount of it, and that which is extracted from the coda should be applied as the clean part of it; and then cure that same thing, and it should not be adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And then the first ones said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular-shaped cautery, rather than with a pointed one.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And then a line is placed on the wider part of the rupture, and another line above it; and your hand is placed with a claw-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is thinner and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the cauterization of twisting.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When a limb is injured by crushing or by impact and persists in that pain for a long time and does not improve with medical treatment, it is customarily cauterized with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery for each member should be according to its size, shape, and location of the injury, and the location of the twisting and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If it is healed by the first cautery, it is good; otherwise, repeat the process on that member; because of the custom of those pains, they are often caused by the limb approaching the body, so you should try to reach them with that cautery before the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers were cauterized by cautery for great benefit, and if the type of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And thus when you want to cauterize that one, consider whether the leprosy is common and as that which we have said in the division and not this, and do not be afraid of the patient that the corruption comprehends all his body and all his appearance, then cauterize that one on the head: with one at the middle of the head, and with the second behind him, pointing the front to the end of the hair; and with others on two ears; and with another behind, on the nape or back.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally your hand at the cautery a little inside where the bone has a small impression, and from there the scales are displaced, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from it; and cauterize on the flesh according to what is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then first use those cauteries that we have mentioned in the chapter; and use a pointed cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both ears, and two on the spines of the neck, and two on the spines of the back, and one large one near the collarbone, and one on the shoulder, and two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on the wrists, and one on each wrist, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the patient's feet; and cauterize all the joints of the mentioned limbs and feet, and on each toe of their feet, and on the soles of their feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful not to burn those nerves that are over the ankle.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some wounds are cauterized with one cautery on the bones of the stomach and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the pharynx.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you will know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and helpful it is; and you will know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as with the others, so that the body of the patient is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And you will know that the cautery points should be large or small according to the members and joints, as prescribed by the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you will take care of the cautery with flour mixed with honey and the other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of cautery for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, poultices, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb member with cautery according to the size of the member or its part.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And if it is a small cautery, enter it into the opening of the tendon a little bit.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And you will take care of that with the ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Sometimes the veins are cauterized to alleviate pain in the feet, ankles, and spine, and the swelling of the nerves that move that member, and the swelling remains.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not make any assumptions about that, but rather the one that is known in the anatomy of the members and the exit of all the nerves that move the entire body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the cauterization of warts that are morphea.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When warts are present and do not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then you cauterize them with a pointed cautery according to the quantity of the specific type of wart that remains white and changes in color, and the color of it changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a poultice made of flour and lentils with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and with the sap of columbine or with the sap of ironwort, each being a separate part and all are mixed together, and then place a cloth over it and leave it on the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of the cautery of the neck.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and one wishes to remove it, then cautery the tumor with a circular cautery around it as it is rotated.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauteryed with the back cautery in the middle place; but I have not seen this, for I fear that it will become an ulcer, and I have already seen such cases.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cautery it around it as we have said, or with a mottled cautery.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 10.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of the cautery of the abdomen.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some abdominal distention is delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess fluids, or due to the patient's old age, being thin, or due to time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the abdomen; then cautery it around it with a small-pointed cautery; and remove the fluid that delays its maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to make a puncture with that cautery, then hold it in this way: and place it at the middle point where it will penetrate the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is placed too high, so that the arm of the patient is injured; and then care must be taken to heal it.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the cauterization of a corroded part.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A corroded part is a decay that moves in the limb, which corrodes it like fire eating dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see that decay in the place where cauterization with fire is suffered, then hold cautery knives of various sizes, according to what is appropriate in the place where the decay is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize that part completely, until you remove all the decay and there is no cause left of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let it rest for three days, and place oil mixed with salt on the cauterized places until all the scars are completely healed and the entire decay is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then carefully care for those affected by flesh generating wounds.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If after three days the flesh grows healthy in the place where there is no corruption, good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization on that which remains in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And apply some acute medical remedies, such as those in place of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, the use of fire as a remedy is not always effective.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already told you the cure for that with acute remedy in the division, and take that which will be needed from it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cauterization of the clitoris and other similar parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Women often suffer from pain in the parts of the foot that are called the clitoris, which is a large cause of pain; and cauterization is done in these two ways, either by fire or by a pointed cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	However, cauterization by fire is to ignite the pointed cautery in the shape of a needle, which should be made of iron according to the amount that contains the clitoris of all parts, and should be thin and sharp.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that heated object on the joint, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it stay there for three days until it begins to swell.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply that poultice made from wild marjoram leaves mixed with salt, and let it stay on the joint for an hour until the pain is gone from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then clean the area with fresh meat juice until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it does not convert, and there are wounds on the surface of the body, especially in the joints and feet, then you should apply these cauteries with water, and you should take a syringe of iron or steel or pen needle, and place it over the joint; and then slowly inject a small amount of water into the syringe, and move your hand, and rotate the syringe around the joint, and press the edge of the syringe on the root of the joint, and find the water entering the root of the joint; and wait for the patient to feel a slight stinging sensation for an hour, and then remove the syringe, because the joint will be healed.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And they did that to those who were brought in, and then bring the other one in close to all of them who had it in their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then care for those who have redness of the skin due to the juices that the flesh absorbs.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of the cauterization of trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When a person has trembling due to a cold or fever, or for another similar cause, then you should cautery them with four cauteries or with one cautery, between each spine on their back, place a cautery; and on their chest, and over their stomach, place an olive oil cauterizing instrument.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of the patient subsides and the healing of the illness is accelerated.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of the cauterization of accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are abscesses that form from thick, corrupted materials, then at the beginning, as soon as it appears, you should cautery it over the entire head of the pustule with a thin, smooth wooden stick, the end of which is extended to the fire; or with a long, sturdy needle; or with a lentecular cauterizing instrument.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes cauterization is applied to the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and not everyone believes in it, and those who do, it disrupts the excess and heals from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But rather that this should be done before evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 66.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of fluxes of blood due to accidental cuts by the arkeria.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many women have fluxes of blood due to cuts by the arkeria that are caused by the plague, or due to the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the member, and similarly, and it is difficult to retain that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens to anyone, you should always place your hand on the opening of the arkeria, and place your hand over that, and then insert those women inside before it stops the flux of blood from that, and that it does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place some small and large olives on the fire by the number of words, and blow over those until they are slightly ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take a small or large second point on the location and the area where the artery is broken, over that vein hurriedly as soon as it has been sewn and restricted that wound.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the wound is expelled from the opening of the artery when you sew and extend the cautery, then take another cautery constantly from the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and do not cease to do so until the wound is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that it does not bring other harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery through the wound, it is not possible to restrict the wound in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, there are four ways: either with a cautery as mentioned above, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when the extremities of it are burned and the wound is restricted, or it is tied with a thread or a bandage for strong structure, or it is placed on medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the wound; and they should be strengthened by a pillow or compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May the one who administers a proper restriction of the limb and a tight bandage or by positioning of causes that cause burns and similar ones, does not compare but rather endures it.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If that happens to anyone and is not the doctor present or medicine, then begin by placing a bandage on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand the great cost of the patient's body, and over the area where the sanguine part of the plague is, and over the armor the said does not remain; and from over the armor sprinkle with cold water of great coldness until it is congealed and swollen; and more covering in which there is a need for cauterization or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incisions and perforations and wounds and of bleeding and of plagues and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that cauterization with fire and medicine is appropriate for all kinds of illness, and their causes and occasions, and the instruments needed in those cases, and we have ordered the chapters of the substance of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so that the one who seeks that which he has lost may be helped, regarding what he will ask.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And I will begin with that, child, so that you know that in this chapter it is about terrorizing what is in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And in order for you to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many evacuations are made, which are done with suction, which is the life of the patient, and aspersion of the vein or incision on the abscess or puncture of exit or purging of the plague or extraction of a tooth and similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the most of them death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this does not happen to you in which there is doubt, because some evacuations are done by hand of men who do so from illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And you should go to the patient's bedside and examine them, and if they are close to death, and they suffer greatly from their illness, and the duration of their illness is long, and the illness is fearful, which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those who give you advice and say that they are healthy, you should not expect them to be healthy, and their illness is dangerous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore do not trust anyone who comes to you in this way; and your caution should be greater than necessary, and your patience; and do not presume any cause without first having certain scientific evidence that confirms this to you, and to which successful succession brings praise.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your diseases prognosis and indication of which is converted to health, because in that one you are helpful over acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and of glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, God inspires in you His understanding and does not take away from you direction and protection, because that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished from the second chapter that precedes in the chapter of cautery, of the treatment of the head between the feet, so that you may be able to answer questions about it and have the necessary knowledge.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the treatment of water that is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You should know that this disease is caused by the infant's age and when the newborn's head touches the child's head, it becomes contagious.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some are caused by an unknown reason.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this disease except in infants; and to all those whom I have seen with this condition, it has been my observation that they are left to die, and for this reason I have considered it to be an unworthy work in those cases.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that an infant's head whose head was full of water, and the child's head was always like this until it could not be put over its own size because of the greatness of its head, and more than the humidity increased until it died.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture or is added between the cartilage and bone, or is added behind the bone over the hip.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	If the operation in that case is where the moisture is between the cartilage and bone and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision at the middle of the chest, and the length of the incision should be two fingers wide so that the moisture can run out, and this is the shape of the drain:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions in this way:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is behind the bone, then you should open the joints of the head from all parts and let the water out when you understand that the neck is open to the parts behind and not that which is in your hand.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	So you should make an incision at the middle of the chest with three incisions in this way:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then extract all the moisture from the incision; and apply dressings and feathers to the incisions; and apply olive oil into the fifth day, and remove the scab and cure the wound with remedies and ointments, and strengthen the head to equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little moisture until the member is restored and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of pus, as some times it appears more in the occipital region, or in the back, or on the right side, or on the left; and then make the incision where the abscess and the collection of pus appear, and do so according to what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and allow blood to flow out, as this could lead to excessive loss of fluid in the patient.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of incision of the arteries that are close to the earlobes, called hilaesse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When an abscess or swelling appears on the thighs or chest, and it is not removed, and you do not trust in the healing of medicines, then this incision of those two arteries would be the cure for this condition.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And then cover when you want to incise those arteries that the patient has on his neck, and remove the cloth from the area where the arteries appear, and place a strong cloth on the back of the patient; and also consider where the vein is located; and the locations of each one on the locations where the earlobes are compressed, and they are hidden in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And approach the arch of the foot with a probe, and insert each one into the space between each part of the bone, and that is how it enters through the bone, and that is according to the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the probe through the artery and cut it where it enters the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be two fingers wide, because when a vein is incised, the blood flows out in a pulsating manner, which stops frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the arch does not appear at the surface, then measure from the ankle the amount of space for three fingers, and approach the probe to the bone and enter it into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that amount of blood that comes out is one or two ounces, and more does not come out easily, and all of that is according to the amount that appears from the virtue of the patient and the retraction of the arch of the foot.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the cause of the pain, and if there is some reason for the callus, then incise it to prevent it from becoming an abscess carelessly.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply strength to the wound with feathers and cloth from the bed, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	About the extraction of the tumors that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When certain ancient and frequent diseases or injuries occur in the temples due to humoral imbalances and quality in the temple bones, or severe and similar to those, and it is treated with medical methods and this does not help, then we have shown in these maladies extraction of the tumors in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises his fingers; and understand the tumor that is apparent in the temple where it is shown by its side, and it is hidden only in a few people due to severity of the disease.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then apply pressure to the patient's neck with some cloth; and then wipe the area with a rough cloth or apply hot water caudal inside until the tumor appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And here is the shape of the tool that you should take:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you should scratch the skin with a sharp tool until you reach the archery; and then get in the hole and extract the parts that are too high inside until you extract the one from the skin and discover the one from the tunics which is left there, from every part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, then wrap it with a piece of cloth at the end of the needle, and then cut off one part according to the length by which its extremities were stretched and contracted, and do not let any blood flow out, because if it is not cut, the blood will not come out from all of it.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then empty the blood in drops.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the archery is large, then fold it in two places with strong double twine or with cords at length, and do not let it touch the putrefaction during the consolidation of the wound and let the blood flow out.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut off the excess that is between two limbs; and do so in that hour or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish, use the pointed cautery to make incisions into the bone of the cautery, where the external parts of it are located, and it will be in the place of that metessa work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better to use the pointed cautery if the patient has a fever or a scalded condition; because the cautery is one of those causes that help to end moisture, and it is better in some cases.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover the extraction of the arteries that have collapsed in the old wound, and place them on clean powder, and then apply appropriate dry medicines to stop the bleeding and heal the wound.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if you are performing another procedure and find bleeding from the artery, then you should press that blood, or use the cautery, or whatever stops the bleeding, and press your hand until the bleeding is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if you do not have any of those causes present, then place your hand over the location where the bleeding is coming from, and apply cold water with great intensity until the acuity subsides, and then press it as appropriate.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And if it is necessary to extract an arrow from the body, you should use this cauterizing tool with two points, as you have previously prepared the two locations where the arrow has entered, and pause when they meet the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that the blood between them does not clot completely.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cauterizing tool:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two points should be exemplary.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the sharpness is less than two points, it is better, because if they are too sharp and approach each other too quickly, they may not cut the flesh at all.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, in those cases where there is some thickness, the heat of the fire should be applied to them and the flesh should be cut more easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than any other work and more useful.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two points should be equal to the thickness of the aforementioned object.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of bodies affected by sharp and acidic gout in the joints.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acidic gout affects the body, and it is the head of the patient that is most affected, and there is no apparent cause for medical treatment, and the face of the patient becomes swollen and feels as if it is swollen like a snail's, and the joints of that person are softened and humidified in such a way that their hairs are already known, and their skins are scratched by the acidity of the tears, the ancient remedies for this operation were called "the scattered ones", and they named that treatment as "the scattered one".
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on his forehead, and then make three incisions equally spaced along the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is less than two fingers: the first incision should be equally spaced from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second incision should be along the length of a little movement of the eyelashes that are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And watch out for the beginning of the arches that are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of the lower jaw.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each beginning is equal to three digits, adjust it.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a dry sponge or cloth at hand, use it to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then place the flat part of two sharp-edged tools between them, which is the shape of the incision of it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part of the temples into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Scrape away all the tissue that is between two incisions on the periosteum, which is above the bone, and then do this from the first incision towards the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then spread this flat tool and enter it into the first incision another time with another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place your hand on the sharp side of the scalpel against the flesh attached to the tissue, and on the other side of the bone, and push it until it reaches the second incision, and cut away all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	While continuing to apply this method to the other side of the codex, then perform it in the groove between the two grooves.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when an equal amount of blood has been drawn from the veins, express the veins of the feet that have been condensed.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And place your hand in each groove of the old man's foot, and place it on those calloused spots that are yellowish, greasy, and dry, and be careful not to cause an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and cure it with an ointment made from basilicon oil and rosewater and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the cure of gout and its descending pains from the parts of the body mentioned in Chapter I.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When any vein is pierced and continues to be so, and the patient's eyes become weak and their vision becomes blurred, and their eyelids are ulcerated and they cannot open them, and in the beginning of the chapter there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you should know that these accidents occur because the matter and gout do not come from other veins but from the veins of the parts mentioned in Chapter I.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best cure for this is to command the patient to turn their face, and then make a small incision on the right side of the forehead, near the temple; and the incision should go through the bone; and extend your hand under the temples, which are swollen due to the bruising.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry out the entire wound with a dry cloth or torn cloth, and then stuff it between the two lips of the incision at the back or with the cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply a poultice made of bran and oil to prevent it from turning into an abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove that and see that the abscess has decreased, then make a poultice of bread crumbs and collyrium, and apply it to the affected area, as if you were taking flour and collyrium in equal parts and mixing them, and from this, a poultice should be made and administered to these wounds, as if it were native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment of that which catches in the armpits.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All the cause that catches in the armpits is one of four species, either it is a mineral stone or a cause similar to a stone, such as iron and wool, or it is a plant like cabbage or beans, or it is a cause of fluxive nature, such as water and vinegar and their similarities, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when a stone catches in the armpit or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust or believe in the armpit, and if the armpit is exposed to the sun, and if you see the stone, then distill some cause of violent oil or vinegar into that area, and administer the extraction of it, and make the person sneeze as a condition, and open the nostrils in preparation for the event of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some cloths or wool around the armpit, and extend the armpit to the parts above, because these are often forgotten in these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not ready, then administer extraction with the instrument called the epicoticar subtle gesture, which has the following form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is ready, then use the gesture; otherwise, administer extraction with the instrument called the subtle double needle.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not ready for that, then make a needle of aram and insert the end of the needle into the ear canal and seal the area around the needle with cera and molten soft wax so that it is not pushed out but the needle.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with the strong attraction of the tie, as many times as we have found.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not ready in this way, then take some warm or well-dressed cloth that has been used to take the soles of the feet, and place that at the end of the ray, and cover it decently with that placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the ear canal and remove the earwax from the moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if all the causes that we have mentioned are not forgotten, then you should proceed to incise that part which caused the abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of incising that part is to first secure the patient's arm with the cephalic vein and remove the second suture according to the method of its virtue, and then make a small incision in the palm of your hand and apply pressure on the parts above, and perform a small puncture in the location where the patient feels the most pain.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the incision does not reach the bone, and the bone is found, then you can use appropriate instruments to remove that part; and then make the incision in that hour with speed, and cure that part before it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause is one of the gouty gravel that we believe and it is inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your instructions, then you should take a thin spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer that abscession of that great wound which was cut in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	and do not do that when you think that that wound has already been moistened by the steam of the ear, and pause it in some pessaries, and prop extract those from which there are oncis or gesti subtil, or ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, because the extraction of it is praised.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	in the water that enters into the ear canal, which the patient uses for sneezing conditioned at the beginning, and fills the ear with old wax, and place a cloth over that ear in which the water is, and if it is removed by that, it is good; and if not, take many small pebbles according to the length of the said, and calf those in the fire for a short time, and the patient introduces one of those into the passage of his ear and strikes it with another stone on the pebble which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not cease this method until all the water is boiled away.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when all the water is boiled away, take a piece of paper or a splint, and place one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until it is completely burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And put another splint and do this many times until all the water is boiled away, and remove that which is under the name of the excessive stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	However, in the extraction of beasts entering into that ear, if it is a small piece, as described above, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large piece that causes pain to the side of the abdomen, then administer the extraction of it with care and oncisions, and the cause of it is more likely than all other causes that are found in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	However, in the extraction of worms that generate in the ear, when you treat that which we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not compare your treatment, then cover that you regulate the ear to the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if any cause of worms appears here, then extract that small or sharp object, but if no cause appears, then take a narrow and wide needle of the following form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And introduce the thin end of the needle into the ear according to the amount that the patient can bear; and then apply strong pressure with that, and do so until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if they do not obey you, then open and close the circuit of the needle with the following wax: then administer distillations that have been used in the past for the treatment of worms, and look for that in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your emission is the one that you use to pour the medical oils into the ear with this instrument of which the following is its form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or copper, narrow, in which there is a small tube, and place it above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it should be used as needed to place the catheter in its cavity here, where it is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the end of the catheter decently, and then insert oil into the concavity of the ear, or some herb, or whatever liquid from these medicines in the catheter — and that is in the syringe —, and then gently press the ray above and express the hand over the area until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil dripping.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is in the syringe should already be heated slightly by the fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And remember that the liquid you will distill in the syringe should not be too cold, because the medicines of the syringe cannot withstand such cold.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the cure of blindness in ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some people are born without the perforation of their belly buttons, and this has also happened to some men, blindness in the flesh of the ear due to plague or because of some flesh in that area; and this blindness is sometimes made at the beginning of the ear canal which does not know the excrement, and sometimes in the parts in front.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And in the first case where the patient does not understand the treatment, it is in the most difficult positions for healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the case where you understand the treatment, place the patient's ear to your mouth and look at him.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an abscess that is about to burst, open it with this thin spatula of the following form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it in which the width is small has one sharp edge and the other not, and the spatula is two lion widths long so that it does not pierce the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the abscess is caused by flesh that has grown in the ear or in the meatus of the ear, then use this thin needle and pierce it with great facility before all the flesh is out.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the abscess is in the front of the ear, then take a thin needle and heat it slightly, and place it in the meatus of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if the patient has been lying in that position for a long time due to difficulty breathing, the pressure on them becomes too great; and be careful not to compress the nerves of the neck.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And place a cloth of the second quantity of the width of the wound that you have wrapped around the thigh; do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any medicine and insert it into the abscess, pulverize it over it, and use it; and if you see that the neck is already infected, then cover it with a cloth that you have wrapped in roasted olive oil, until the abscess is healed; and cure it within that time.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If there is a flow of pus, then submerge a cloth or towel in cold water and place it on the neck, and use the other cure that restricts the flow of pus, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of azoth, which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Azoth that sometimes occurs in the eyelids of the eyes is wet, and some are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should have those bandages or cotton, and remove those spacers from their eyes, and place your hands on the areas according to the following.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is pain from blood flow, then you should cauterize those eyes with a thin cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cauterization is to remove the incisions and dry wet areas when there is still some cause of their eyes; and when they are cauterized with fire, those eyes are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of granulosis that occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Wet areas sometimes occur in the eyelids of the eyes that resemble granulosis in its strength and hardness, and because it grows, it is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And there is a collection of thick moisture under and above the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation in them is considered as follows: if the large one originates in that which appears from the eyelid and is smeared on all parts; and the cause of it is unknown.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision over that which appears from the eyelid, and scrape all parts to facilitate its escape, and then suspend it with a thread and cut off that one.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you do not appear to have the incision of it if you do not put it in the eyelid so that it does not penetrate the eyelid with a few at a time, then it is never known in any case.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and cure that within which it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, it will not cause harm to that which the ointment of it restores and encases.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the large one is declining to the parts beneath the eyelid, then wash the eyelid and suspend the large one with a thread, another that you indicate for incision, and press all parts, and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, then it is never known in any case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash the wound with salted water; and treat the area with the same thing that it contains so that it can be healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	About the care of the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Excessive grey matter that is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and more so in children, aggravates the wounds of those and causes their cataracts to increase; and they cannot look at the clarity of the sun because tears gather on them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you see those people talking all the time, and talking while they sleep; and their eyelids are wet, which have already been covered by inflammation, and the appearance of cataracts is in the eye; and when you press on the area with your fingers, you can feel the cataract inside them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some method of operation is in that which the patient pauses his own head on the chin, and then place a cloth of lead and of the wound, and make it into a circle according to the amount that it contains all the parts, and then place that over that and press on the fingers of all so that cataract is added in the middle of the circle, and then make an incision in the middle of that humidity with a needle in the slit, and the slit should not be larger than the slit that is made in flaubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the first incision you make in the abdomen until you reach the arch of the ribs, where in the most displaced processes, the arch is found according to the form of a white ridge.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract those cloths that you have wrapped between the thighs, which are called the parts of the fornix, and rotate them between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to adjust in the fissure so that the space does not reach the bone and the other.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If you do not see it at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust a small instrument in the fissure; and then extract that which we have said; and place cloths soaked in warm water and vinegar over them and press them over the area and wash those instruments.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And you should know that they sprinkle salt and press it in the cavity of the fissure so that whatever remains of that moisture is removed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an abscess occurs in that location, then treat it with a poultice made of certain herbs until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the methods of touching the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of wounds are not adjusted by their natural hairs and are antiquated, then touch the wound and make methods to cure such injuries as frequent tears and softening of the eyelids and cloth until that cause of destruction of the wound which is called tactinir of the wound, and cure it in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization; or by making an incision and suture; or by cannulas as I will describe.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore cover that the head of the patient is covered with your left hand; then convert the eyelid of the wound to your left hand, and if it converts, it is good; otherwise, insert a needle in the part where the skin is closest to the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through that part, and that is — on the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs — near the hairs, and pull the thread upwards above the eyelid, and convert it to the side.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Approach the part of the eyelid where the eyelashes are located and carefully insert a thin instrument into the lacrimal canal; then remove the foreign body and place it beside the eyelid, dabbing it with cotton or cloth, and then cover the eyelid with a tent-like shape.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is important to note that the shape should be adjusted according to the degree of elevation of the eyelid, as this varies among men, and those who require a large incision in the eyelid should have it done according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then approach the thin instrument over the two lines that you have sewn, and begin from the lacrimal canal into the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural eyelashes, it should be as large as possible.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the ointment in one of the two angles of the eyelid, and scrape off the entire area, and adjust the stitching with the two lips of thin wool or silk, and wipe away any excess, and if you wish to do this, do so, otherwise, do not worry about it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And after three or four days, approach the wound stitches and care for that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound stitches open, and care for that with a dry and tight bandage, as the eyelid needs sealing and attachment; however, closed stitches are better, and therefore I will not discuss the old methods of taping.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in their care, it is a good operation, and not due to fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another method in taping, and that is to place a piece of silk or muslin over the eyelid, and then raise the eyelid with three fingers separated and gathered according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if it is not possible to do that, then hold the fingers separately and gather them together according to this form: take a needle with thread in it, and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other needle into the lacrimal canal, and the second needle into the lower lacrimal canal, and adjust between the two needles the equal length, and then raise your hand with an equal elevation, raise the entire eyelid over the area where it should be placed as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and heal it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If a pus-filled abscess occurs on your finger or your gum, cover that abscess with wax and apply the same ointment to it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some eyelids that are turned inside out can be covered with the same ointment that we mentioned for wounds, but stitches are more artificial in that case.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To bandage the legs is as follows:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	First, turn the eyelid and cut the figure that is inside according to what I have mentioned; then, using art, make two thin strips of cloth or paper that are as long as the eyelid and their width is slightly narrower than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already incised at the ends of each section where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add each thin strip under the excess of the eyelid and tightly tie the strips of each section, leaving it for several days until the string decomposes and is rejected and rots inside if it does not cause any harm.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is too late, then break the bone at the joints, and then cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So when it is hardened, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not prick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make these kinds of cans according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	About raising the sharp hairs in the wound when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are unnatural hairs, hard, sharp, and prickly, and the wounds, then perform the operation in such a way that you take a thin needle and place it on a soft, thin silk thread, and adjust the ends of it and the knots as gently as possible.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you make another thin thread next to it in a short time, and use the ends of that if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and be close to the sunlight so that your work can be clearly seen, because it is a delicate and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the eyelid where it is necessary to make an incision, and make it penetrate into the eyeball quickly before it goes beyond the natural limit of the eye.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the eye out and insert it into the solution, and put one or two or three and not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand out and insert it into the solution, where the eye is not too far from the eyelid and the natural limit of the eye.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is not too far from the solution, then insert it into the parts that you have composed, until it is far enough from the true limit of the eye.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then look at the eye from the side, because you are inserting it and the true limit of the eye, and shake it and clean it, and leave it closed for two or three days, until the eye adheres to its place and grows back healthy flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the blanket is too short, then you adjust a longer blanket than the natural ones, and elevate that one, or let it lie flat until it is long enough to cover the space, and then elevate that one.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	About the cure of a foreign body that is in the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it is in the eye and removing it, and the contraction of the eyelid when it is turned upwards, to the right or left side, due to a bad consolidation of the eyelid or a drying out or a cauterization, and this is called leporina, and whether it is natural or accidental, and it is made because of a bad consolidation of the eyelid or a drying out or a cauterization, or due to similar causes.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the method of the operation be that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place in it in that which is between those a cloth of lint, and tie them together before they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not use treatment that dries out the causes of which they are contracted, because if you do so, it will return worse than at any other time when they had no fire.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that of causes that soften such as fenugreek, and apply the steam from the water in which they are soaked and sown, or use goose oil, which should be liquefied with some olive oil, and apply it to the affected area, and cure it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your treatment is that you puncture all the swellings that are not solidified according to the form in which fire has been used at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation, which we have said, is only a correction of the contracture that does not return the form of the area according to what fire has given.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of contractures that are made in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This contracture that is made in the eyelid, which is not called a vertical contracture; and it is of two kinds, one natural, another accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental injuries are caused by blows or cuts or burns or other similar events.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of the operation is to take a needle with which you make double thread, and place it in the flesh, and make it pass from the lacrimal of the left eye into the lacrimal of the right eye, until the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh to the parts above the needle and hold it with the other hand, and insert it into the wide space.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the figure of the eyelid returns to its original shape, it is good; otherwise, take the razor and place it on the broken part, and convert that eyelid, and make the two wounds on the side of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of the two wounds are made into two angles at the beginning, which you make to meet each other, and make the angle of the other one enter until they form a figure of their own.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this Greek letter figure is the letter lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh from that part which is the length of the wound after it has been cut, which is called the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and tie them with flax thread; and then care for those with the mentioned softening medicines and hot compresses until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if it is necessary to use a stitch or suture or cauterization, then make sure that you cut the flat incision on the eyelids according to what is prescribed.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the hot compress between two lips as they have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the sermon on the cure of incisions when it is raised or lowered, that it should run in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of incisions, and that is in the form of various shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled surgeon always prepares instruments in each possible way that is possible for him to return the figure to its natural form, or near it, and the patient according to what is convenient for the operation and tools in the best positions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter Fifteen
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in men who have their eyelid stuck under the eyebrow and prohibited from easy movement and their natural works, then you should insert the extraction of the ray behind the eyelid, and lift it up or extend it to the eyelid.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you should insert the adhesion with a thin needle, which is not sharp enough to cause injury, so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the needle without leaving it in the eyelid.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be made to easily remove that adhesion, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you should apply saltwater to the eyelid, which you wash with; or distill in it some dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the swelling under it, place wool soaked in honey on the swelling, and use the third day's urine of a consolidating nature until he is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	About the beginning of a nail and the flesh of the eyelids.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You should know that the nail is of two kinds, either nervous, which is similar to a hard, fine bone; or non-nervous, which is like white mucus, which when it comes into contact with the skin, often causes an abscess to form in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And the non-nervous ones do not begin until the larger lacrimal duct, which gradually covers the sight and prevents light and movement of the swelling.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	If the worker begins at the beginning of it, then place the patient's head in your lap, and raise the swellings of it, and lift the eyelid with your hand, and collect the nail from the abscess and extend it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert it into the horn of a cow or a buffalo or a fish, or something similar, or strong iron, or double the tip of the needle gradually and place that in the middle of the nail, and pierce it with the needle, and hold the nail; and extend it to the parts above, and excoriate the skin on the side of the nail which is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then continue that with the needle into the back of the patient.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then insert the needle into the lacrimal canaliculus, using thin forceps or small scissors, and cut the tissue of the lacrimal duct so that it does not become continuously leaking tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And also some of the nail is extended or held firmly, as we have said, and then scrape the skin on the side of the nail which is the shape of this:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the corneal tunic and that it does not break in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Approach the beginning of the foot with a small amount of salt or crushed herbs, and let it soak for several days; then care for that part which has been affected.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not too sharp and you cannot insert the needle, or it does not stick in that place, then this type of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed as it was and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you want to incise that part, then you begin by opening the thigh of the patient and taking a thin, sharp lancet of fine sharpness according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with its fineness.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that that part is thinned and contracted and has been placed in that place, then let it soak for several days with your urine or with herbs made of rosemary or salt crushed into powder, and cover the wound with a bandage.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until all that is left of it has been removed, but if the opposite abscess is not in the wound, then let it alone and cure the abscess when it begins to heal.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And continue your operation until he is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The blockage of the lacrimal canal, if noted inside the eye for great harm, should be pierced with an onion; and incise that part, and do not finish the incision so that it does not cause excessive tears to flow.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a drop of rose oil into the lacrimal canal until he is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the incision of a certain animal and of that which is born from meat adjusted inside the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes meat is born inside the eyes of certain animals, and it is overlaid on the pupil, or approaching or extending over the eyelids and strongly pressing the eyelids to the parts deformed and it is assembled at the rose of a balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	During the operation in which the patient's head is raised on the bed; and then open his eyes and collect all that meat with an onion or with a spoon; and then incise the meat at the beginning until it is finished by the incision, and guard yourself from the eye that you do not descend that which is your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And if you have inserted an instrument that we recommended at the tip of the needle, or small forceps that collect abscess secretions as they approach this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then, when your instrument is completely inserted and the entire area has been cleaned, fill the wound with salt water, or apply a powder of rosemary and similar to corrosive medicines, and place a sterile bandage over it until the abscess is securely closed.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there is any cause for alarm and the wound is not healing properly, and you fear an abscess, then lance the wound and treat that abscess with something that drains it, and repeat this operation until it is healed, and similarly treat the surrounding flesh that was affected by this wound.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, if your patient has all wound healing naturally or accidentally, use iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you are sure that this member can bear this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of collecting blood from the vein.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Blood vessels that are swollen and hardened over the vein and prevent the surgeon from performing their operation, and they develop the vein for a certain number of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider whether the vein in which there is blood clotting is strong and not another disease that causes blood clotting, then you collect that clot.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And if you command the patient to hold their head still, and then suspend those veins with an elastic band or two according to your judgment; and that band should be of thin double thickness in this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two bands gradually in a circle like this:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then collect those veins with thin forceps, thinning them gradually, and wipe away the blood every now and then until they are clean from the vein and can be folded.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to damage the vein at its extremities; and if your operation is in the morning, and you have a strong hand in your operation, then do not cut but those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then distill some cold water or rose oil into the wound to reduce its inflammation and ease the pain that remains from the blow.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if you cannot obtain any at that time, then apply all the remedies that alleviate its pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is reduced and the abscess is secured.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the process until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the form of forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reducing hernias to their place.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat hernias with a sharp cautery or medicine, do not insert it into the abscess, but cut open the abscess to drain all the fluid that is in it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackness in it, then use this instrument:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And if it is named an acute head, and made of iron, and the cap is rounded like a helmet that has been punctured by a puncture of lima or aliskalfati for subtle puncture (like in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the location of the bone corruption, and slowly rotate it between your thumbs called, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, and then restore the location with drying and styptic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the location is consolidated and it is in good flesh and the body is free from infection for forty days, and it does not recur, does not become an abscess, and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then you should reduce the crack to the shape of the nose, and in this way: and it is that you uncover the bone with a second sharp iron or medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then you take a tribe in this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The external part of the iron is triangular, and its length is extended into the end as if it were a needle.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place that over the bone, and that one near the lacrimal; and hold your hand a little away from the bone, and then move your hand towards the tribe where it enters the bone, and that one feels the patient's pain as if it were piercing through.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, restore the area with astringent medicines that you have seen before.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Since the flesh and the area are hardened, therefore the matter that was flowing to the joints returns to its place, so that is less painful for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the bone.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the bone is prominent and does not cause damage or reduction in the excretion, then loosen the patient, and then follow it, and place several incisions on the neck for good suction; and then place a liniment on the bone made of pitch, aloe, salt, and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster on the bone with powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method for cleaning the feet is to take cloths of lion's mane, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; and make those cloths.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place one on top of the other according to the amount needed for the required purpose.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then apply strong pressure on those cloths with durable, tightly bound string; and repeat the suction of the wounds; and afterwards, remove the cloths and leave the wound straight during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if during the softening of the ligament it becomes too straight, then be careful that it is not too straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the ligament as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound has already been reduced, good; and if not, then repeat the application of the ointment to the feet and the ligament and the cloths until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	About the beginning of the elevation of the uveal membrane.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a rupture in the uveal membrane, and it elevates and protrudes out of the eyelids like a large lump, and it takes on the form of a person, and you want to incise it, then the operation is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the edge of the uvea from the part below to the part above, and place another needle in the part that is double the width of the lacrimal duct, and make that penetrate; and then remove the first needle according to its position; and incise the location of the double thickness and lift that part of the uvea around the needle, and press that strongly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place it on the woollen cloth soaked in album of egg white and let it rest until the thread is dry.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure the wound with that which comforts the one who is afflicted until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some compresses are made from the entire part of the cloth inside the wound, adjusted to a large circle, and then perforated with a thin spatula that reaches the bottom of the wound, and drain the albuminous humidity, and then lower the wound and insert it immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of cataracts.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease that is called cataracts is not other than a substance that is adjusted in the wound like descending water and is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The way to work on it is that the patient should sit over the prepared and adjusted chair, and then take the head in your hands from two parts and that one inside which you see the substance arriving at the parts behind, and then dry it and do not let it descend, and stop the light, and the disease will be seen as it is.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down, you will know that it is a fever.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If it does not prepare the descent to sanity, then let the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula and gently place it on the conjunctiva and continue until the eyeball is expelled from its socket.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, when it is expelled, you will pour in the prepared water mixed with honey or water in which you have already made a fenugreek and honey mixture.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the other causes until they are healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure of the fever that comes from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and what is suitable for breaking according to the speech declaring, then that second healing.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then let it be known that you should let the patient sit between your hands on a chair and hold their head firmly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your hand near the eyelid of the sick person, if the sick person is right-handed, then place your hand on the right eyelid; or if the sick person is left-handed, then place your hand on the left eyelid.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then take the right hand of the sick person if the sick person is left-handed; or take the left hand of the sick person if the sick person is right-handed.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the end of your right hand near the crown of the head for the thickest part of the ray in the album of the eye on the outer side of the lower lacrimal duct, and then gently roll your hand over that.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the eye and feel that your hand has reached the cause of the problem.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And cover the measurement of the hand palm at the beginning of the space that is between the pupil and the end of the black circle, which is the crown of the eye; because you will see the pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunica.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Approach the area where the water is, and then throw a cloth nearby. If the water starts to descend, move the patient to that place, and place them on their side.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; if the water starts to descend, then you should pause at that other cloth before it gets wet.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is dry and not descending, you should remove the cloth with ease, and wipe the area of your hand little by little, and then dissolve a small amount of clear salt from gemstone in the water, and wash the wound with that; and then place a cotton or stopper soaked in rose oil and album of egg white on the wound.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	And those who have been in our time have used that with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your cloth to the instrument of the wound due to its hardness — which is one of the men from whom the wound is very hard — then cover that which you take, the spatula which is called the alberid of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And so pierce that joint at that point, and do not remove your hand from the wound, and see if you are not making a subtle error in the location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then perform the second subtle procedure as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should give the patient the complement of your work, that is, prepare them for a sleeping position that has been done well, and make sure they lie on their back in a dark room, and prohibit all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place your hand on that part of their body to make it straight and not bend their head to the right or left of all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the bandage be according to their condition until the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that from that dark room and extract the free fluid, and make the patient see some causes, and then return the bandage within the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not cover that in the hour of the cures or soon after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having covered that, you should remove it so that the water can flow more easily and not too strongly and violently.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If an abscess is caused by a cautery, then let it drain for seven days, and then apply a poultice to that area where the abscess was.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then examine the patient's face and place your hand over their mouth to prevent them from vomiting, which exists in the dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually raise the patient's head and talk about their causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in some cases the disciple of vision is not excused from work for several days, and then you should be careful about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have learned from some of those who are in Arthur, and some say that they make fire in the Air Mountain by piercing the rock where water is found.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen any way to obtain water in our land that has been perfect, nor has any water been found in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of Air Mountain by which one can be above those who do not know those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	If the bones are broken or made of iron properly, and their external parts are like this subtle triangle, the sharp end is like that form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	About the cure of flesh in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are different fleshy growths attached to it, due to some cause that is similar to a spike of a mule's foot, or a polyp; and this disease is called polypus, which is similar to that thing represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from there, the flesh is cancerous, the pale, of dark color; and from there, the flesh is not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is in these fleshy growths, not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should make the patient sweat between your hands and place it under the sunlight, and wipe the nose of it, and prick the affected area on those fleshy growths.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the parts of the forehead, and then cut off what you have understood from those sharp spaces of the one part where you know that all the flesh has been stopped; because if it is from any cause of which the incision is possible, then you should remove that with one of the small tools to facilitate what was from it.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the lord has an abscess or a pus-filled wound, then pause at that place; or it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize the area where the pus has been completely removed and all the cavities have been closed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then take out the pus from the nose and place it near the beginning of the wound with water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is packed and moisture enters into the palate, then know that it is healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not enter after the wound has been closed, then know that there is no flesh in the pus that rises to the bones of the nose where it cannot be reached by an abscess.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then after the wound has been closed, if there is any swelling on the part that is to be applied, and rub in the mouth with the amount of salt or medicine that is suitable for the patient, and between each application, pause and examine the patient and apply another end of the cloth in the nose to relieve the pain or for some other cause that is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when that is done, draw the patient's odorant close to where it reaches the nasal canals, and place it on their glabella, as troops of children at school do, and it is the likely cause of this action.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place both of the patient's extramitties on their nose, one on top and the other underneath, and administer a salt of meat to the nostrils that are in the patient, and do this until you know that the meat is already in the patient's nostrils.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the patient, and place in their nose an abstraction of salt water, and do this for three days or more until the putrid matter completely disappears from the meat.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, place in their nose a plug of lead to prevent any harm until they are healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if the cure does not work, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to purge the nostril with which they are distilled oils and medicines in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do this with silver or wool, which is similar to a small open lamp, like a small cup, and the meat in the same way.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed cannula like this with a straw, and the cannula of the instrument should be able to purge and be flat, open; at which end you hold it when you pierce in oil or that liquid you want from the sucs and the causes suckable.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this is the recipe for the purging: take castor beans, white bay leaves, ginger, pepper, long pepper, escafragia, and spice anise; mix them with the juice of blood and milk, and make them into pills, and dissolve one pill in warm water, and give it to the patient through their nose.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of the pills in the external parts of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The pills should be placed in the external parts of the nose, and they are magnificent and effective in other days when it is necessary to look at their effect.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for that reason, you should insert it at the beginning of its appearance, and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place your hand or cautery or burning medicine over the area where it was.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the insertion has not been made before it becomes magnificent, consider whether it is calcified, hard, of dark color and little pain, then do not touch that iron which is apostema crancos; for it was caused by the great malice of the one who inserted this abscess on that person.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of lion touch and not of dark color, and it is possible to insert it in all that, then evacuate the patient and insert that sense of fear, and cure the area with that which dries and contracts before it becomes healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of sutures of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by injury or similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You should know that when the solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, little confidence is placed in that operation in those people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then cover, when the wound has any cause of those that you consider if it is fresh and bleeding, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure that within which it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of continuity are already separated, and each one is healthy, then cover that you excise each part of their skin within which it does not bleed.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips with stitches and strengthen those, and above them sprinkle healing dragon's blood and three-nine powder, and place a poultice of diaphanicon diafinicon or any other consolidating plaster on top of it, leave it for two days or three, and then remove that and replace the plaster and cure that within which the wounds have healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of stitching is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or add the solution of continuity to the wound as you have made known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	About the extraction of those causes that come in the inner thighs in the divided parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	There are abscesses in the inner thighs of some men in the divided parts of their labia, similar to boils, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should turn the labia and cut each of those hard parts, and then fill the abscess with a strong mixture until it is healed, and then wash the area with vinegar and treat it with what has stiptic properties until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	About the beginning of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A large abscess is present on the adjusted flesh in the gums, which the ancients called albulus, so you should suspend that with an onion or whatever you have to that with forceps and incise it from its base, and leave the pus to run out or the wound.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And place your hand on the wound, or apply some other stanching or drying powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then insert it secondarily, and cauterize it, so that the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the reason for iron teeth.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When sharp, hard, and sometimes black tartar is adjusted to the surface of the teeth, between the teeth and gums, and some stains are yellow or green, it indicates corruption through which the teeth become yellow.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore, you should scrape the patient's hands and place your cap on their head, and remove the teeth in which those sharp and similar tartar are found, without any cause of damage, and that is how blackness and yellowness and other stains are caused.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If that is still the case, then it is good; otherwise, repeat the reasoning on those teeth on the next day and the second and third until it reaches the final statement in which you want it to be.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you should know that teeth require various shapes of files and different figures according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	So that you can see the shapes of files that are used to remove the part of the tooth from the gum and another file that is used to smooth between the teeth in different shapes, and these shapes of files should be prepared by you as soon as possible:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	That you cure the tooth of its pain from beginning to end in all extraction of it, because there is no cause that should delay the movement of it when it is extracted, because the substance is sublimated within which is extraction of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May it be that when the patient is prepared to have that tooth extracted, you should first be certain what tooth is causing pain, because sometimes the movement of the tooth deceives the patient and makes them think it is a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is extracted, which we have already seen in the operation of teeth.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you must certify which tooth is causing the pain, and what you know is, firstly cover that tooth with some space in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth from the gum of all parts, and then bring that to the teeth called wisdom teeth, or subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that you have removed.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then place a large log in the strong jaws for good communication or blockage, and place the patient's head between the two nails that you hold so that it does not move, and then pull the tooth straightly in a way that it does not give more pain to the patient nor to you.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place it there beside all parts to facilitate and effort the removal of that which is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or worn, then cover that broken and tighten it with a thin wire at the end so that it is not broken in the hour of your construction upon that which you hold.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should work carefully with incision around the entire part of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not tear it from there, and return over the patient for the main cause of his first pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And guard yourself that you do not do what unskilled barbers do in their practice and audacity for the eradication of them, which they do not administer what we have recommended; for these reasons, great evils come upon men with maladies, which are more difficult than those that have been cured, and all of their symptoms remain, or some of those, or that extracts from there with unskilled barbers have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And the eradication of it is washed with water or vinegar and salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is a flow of pus through an opening, as unskilled barbers do, then take some charcoal and sprinkle it on the wound, and if that does not match, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and holding them subtly with the fingers that are praised for their long, thin, and straight shape, so that they will not bend when performing tasks.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And if there are times when you need to use a thick handle, ensure that the long, thin, and straight forceps are not bent, but rather short ones.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And if you need to use Indian-descended straight forceps, place the teeth of those that fit into each other and use them to strongly construct, and sometimes they are shaped like the beak of a ciconia bird, which is strong and has great construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and extraction of bones from the lower jaw that are impacted.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to remove a tooth that is impacted due to some cause, first place your hand over the location where the tooth is located for one day or two until that location becomes soft; then use analgesics or hold the handles of the forceps that are shaped like the beak of a ciconia bird or guanta, which is the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The outer parts of their joints were cut away using a knife or scissors.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if they do not obey your command and this forceps or hold it, then you should cut over the bone and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called the atali, which is a small saw with a shape like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if it is short and thick, make a small one, but not too thick so that it is not square.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the bone is cut away, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular chisel in which there is some roughness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a more delicate tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you have already helped yourself with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the appropriate shape following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And you have other instruments that I will describe in the extraction of teeth; because it is well done with this instrument which resembles an onion large, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the angular or short end of the triangle, which is some swelling, and not too thin so that it is not triangular.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And other wise, the tools for teeth are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the skilled and subtle in the art, seek for themselves according to what they mean by this operation and various diseases; because of the diseases to which the ancients did not say or pause a proper instrument, due to the different forms of various species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	May it be triangular the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth, or if it is broken, then carefully apply that which is convenient for this instrument and for forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of teeth, and help you with how to handle this one:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if it is in any swelling, little by little, and it is tightened or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak until the entire bone is completely broken; then restore the place with appropriate medicines to this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small pustule on the bone, then prick that pustule and its black core, and cure it within so that it becomes healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter thirty-two.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent and do not naturally fit in their own shape, especially when they extend beyond the others, and more so when they extend towards women, and especially when they extend towards virgins; therefore consider whether another tooth is close to it, and if there is no possibility of removing or extracting it, then remove that one. However, if it is not connected to another tooth, then use this instrument to cut it out; it resembles a pig's tusk, and should be made of Indian iron with an edge that is sharp.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And if you cut it out over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it is not connected to another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a prominent tooth is exposed to the surface, then shave it with this instrument made of Indian iron;
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let the iron from India and the sharp edge be used alone; and let the pointed needles be made like the lima bean, which are made into needles, and the teeth of the needle should be shaved a little at a time in small days for convenience, so that there is no other tooth that is worn out and broken.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then draw lines along the linea alba, and shave it with a razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if there is a tooth from which part of the tongue is wet and sticky, then you should scrape that into it so that the roughness of that part is stopped and covered, and it is filled in order to prevent the tongue from descending or the word from being corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of worn out teeth with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents happen to the teeth in front of the jawbone and removal by percussion or impact, and the patient cannot bear that which has happened, and you have treated it with hemostatic medicines, and your treatment has not been successful, then in order to prevent them from breaking in those that are strong with gold and not silver, because silver turns yellow and soon becomes poor, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And if the bone is in such subtlety and roughness according to the amount that could enter between the teeth; and the form of the remedy is that you take the bone and double it between two healthy teeth, and then gradually increase the twists of the bone between two rotten teeth, or if one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the remedy in the same place where you started, and strengthen your hand with skill and knowledge until it is not rotten.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your string be the one that strengthens the bone by holding the ends of the teeth so they do not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then remove the excess ends of the bone with forceps or tweezers, and add those to each place where you used them, and convert those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the rotten tooth, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then remove that which is so strict like a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is dislocated or broken, then apply that or those joints in such a manner during the entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the form of healthy teeth and the figure of straightness of two healthy teeth, as follows:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when a tooth or two returns to its original place, and is recreated as we have recommended, and remains so.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Only good craftsmen and knowledgeable people can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Some people are suitable for certain causes of cow bones, and they make them into the shape of a tooth, and place it in the location where the tooth is missing, and apply it as we have said, and remain so for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	About the beginning of the lingual nerve that enters the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This nerve that comes from the tongue, some people are born with it, and others have it accidentally and it has become solidified.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation involves opening the patient's mouth, exposing their tongue; then raising it, and inserting a needle along the length of the tongue until it is solved from the base.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	However, if there is any difficulty or resistance, and this is due to the consolidation of plaque, then you should use an instrument and cut it along the length until it is dissolved and the resistance is removed.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	Be careful not to make an incision in the flesh of the tongue, and cut here and there, so that it does not cause bleeding from the wound.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the traces of the incision with water, vinegar, or a damp cloth; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from moving, so that another layer does not form.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	However, if there is bleeding from the wound, place your hand over the location of the bleeding; but if the blood flows, then apply a cautery to the location with a pointed cautery that is suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then approach those other causes that may be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, due to certain wounds on the tongue, abscesses form that resemble a small swelling, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function; and if it is not treated in time, it can cause great harm to the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in this case is to open the mouth of the patient and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see that the abscess has a black or dark color, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch that part that is swollen.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is whitish, in which there is moisture, then you should put the needle in it, and insert a thin, sharp instrument, and cut it from all parts; and if pus comes out during your operation, then pause above the wound with a piece of cloth, so that the pus does not spread.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work before the patient has finished recovering, before they are washed with warm water and salt; and care for that one while you do the other treatment at the same time.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from the armpits and those that are located in the groin and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess occurs in the groin, it is the glands that are similar to wool, which are deformed and called armpits, which when you cure them with what we have said in the division, do not heal, then you consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, and little pain, then do not touch it with a needle.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the core is large, then do not touch it with a needle for fear of spreading the infection; let it mature inside, and later you will either incise it or let it burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, soft, and the core of it is thin, then that one should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation in him is that you consider, during your operation, if the abscess has completely healed or if it has decreased at all; and then make sure the patient is facing you, and hold his head still, and open his mouth, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of him, and the instrument is a noble one of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then when you press that tongue against the abscess and show it to him, and cut over that his gum, then take a needle and place that in the wound, and pull that as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that you pull from the tissues, and then cut it with the instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is shaped like forceps, but the outer parts of which are bent, so that the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, because they are sharp, and it should be made of iron and well-made.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not at your present, then insert this pointed spatula of which this is the form: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And once you have inserted one needle, insert the other according to this manly method of insertion, and then guard the patient from water that is too wet.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a flow of blood, guard the patient from water that is too cold from decanting or from the milk of a goat or similar to those of the strengthening causes that are within the flow of the blood, and then cure it within the time that it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes these abscesses are located elsewhere in the body or other than those two golden ones, and then insert those according to what I have said in the insertion of two needles equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in the same location as before, which was turning black, of little pain, which had already closed the same location, and the woman was breathing very tightly, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and had already reached the point of death if more time passed by a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had become so large that it had pushed two ribs inside, protruding through two wounds.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So he carefully cut it open and placed it in one of the wounds, and pulled out that one, and then tied off a large portion of it, and then carefully incised the other wound where the other injury was, and then covered its mouth and held its tongue, and then carefully placed the wound in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then he carefully removed a large portion of it, and not much blood flowed from it but a little bit of pus.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, he completely cleaned the wound of that woman, and then soon began to pour water on it, and then immediately applied medicine, so he did not cease to incise into that abscess for a long time, and another abscess formed in its place, which he incised until it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So he then applied a bandage and cauterized the wound of it, and then immediately applied a poultice; and then he walked around and did not know what God had done for that woman.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter thirty-seven.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	When a hernia is formed at its beginning.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh occurs in the hernia, and it is formed and lengthened, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the part behind which is thick and round, and then it is called bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When the disease is cured by the method we mentioned earlier, and you do not compare your treatment, and if you have already seen that the abscess has been removed from there and is thin, then you should incise the part that is rounded; and if it is at a certain length, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and is not at the center, then you should incise the beginning of it, where the patient feels pain.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that the second part is white and long, then you should examine the patient and take the tongue of it with an instrument that processes its shape and place the probe in the new one, and pull that down and incise it with one of two instruments which are called in the beginning of two needles.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And do not pierce that, but rather what is adjusted to the natural end of its addition, because if you pierce it more, you will cause it to speak.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then, use what we have recommended for the incision of two girls, and cure that within which it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient was frightened by the incision of that, then use what is used in the cauterization of that, and the manner of the cautery in it is not other than sharp water, and you should place the head of the patient in your hand, and take the tongue of that with the instrument we have mentioned, and take the water which we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and comfort that living cause, and do not press too hard or too subtly, and from there fill the hollow of the instrument which has this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	And the extrusion of that should be in the cavity where the medicine is placed with the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument over the medicine, and the patient should lean on their side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that enters through the intrinsic medicine, so that no other cause remains in the groove of that and that it does not descend from that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand on the medicine and express it onto the uvula for the span of an hour until that which is denigrated and sedated by the bite of the medicine enters.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a piece of cloth and wrap that around the end of the needle, and immerse the cloth in the medicine, and insert the needle into the cloth until the cloth adheres to that needle, and do this as many times as you want from the cauterization of the grape, and then leave it where it will dry and fall off in three days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat that, and then clean the cauterization around the grape and around the needle in a circular manner with a border, and modify what is inside the circle of the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and cure it with fomentation, and give the patient garglings until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this method of treatment is safer than others and longer lasting.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some wounds are cured with a substance that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, which is cured by sublimation in this manner: take chamomile, sage, origanum, rue, scissored Arabic, camomilla, broyda, and similar herbs to those of the herbs, and adjust all these causes or some of them in a bowl, and immerse them in hot water and bulge; and the bowl should be well washed with decent lye, and there should be a trough above the bowl where an instrument made of copper according to this manner can be placed.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the end into the patient's mouth before the steam reaches the uvula on the tongue, before the uvula becomes too obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat this procedure on those wounds before they dry, and keep in mind that you should not do this cure at the beginning of the formation of abscesses, because it would be too adjusted to the abscess, and do not let you do this, but leave the declaration of the abscess of it carefully.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument present, then take a stick and place a piece of wet cotton at its end, in order to dampen the patient's mouth, as the cloth of the humidifier prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	About the extraction of thorns and other things that stick to the sole, and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Thorns or other objects stick to the sole of the foot or other causes.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore, observe what you extract from those that are visible, above which the sight, so that you may use the tongue-like instrument to remove it, in order to determine what is in the sole.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not visible and is hidden in the sole, observe that you make the patient vomit when the food is being digested in the stomach, as the attached cause is often expelled by vomiting; or that the patient swallowed a piece of bread or rice or a bone; or took a piece of sea sponge and soaked it very well in alcohol, and then placed it on the patient's tongue, as when the food is being digested in the place where thorns and other things are extracted, they are often expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And then take an eel and cook it with a little bit of salt, and cut it into pieces on a clean table and extract the bones; or take a pork and cook it with salt and extract the bones.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if you do not forget those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of the following form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be as wide as a small ring, and in the extraction of it there is a cavity that you insert into the patient's mouth to facilitate.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And the patient's head is raised upwards, and be careful that the touch of his jawbone from the neck, so that it does not engage with it and cause pain or damage to the bone or the spine, or what the doctor puts on his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But if the patient allows that instrument to be inserted into his mouth, because of his knowledge of the location of the cause and it is pushed downwards, and he pulls his hand up with the instrument, all this according to the amount that is prepared at the time when it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter thirty-nine.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of blood that is attached to the gallbladder.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood is treated as we have mentioned in the division of medicine and not as we have said, consider the following in the gallbladder of the patient during the sun, since you have understood the language of the instrument that you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see blood, extract it with a small needle or with a fine gentle instrument.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to withdraw it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gallbladder of the patient, and place your hand on the concavity of the cannula, holding an ignited iron, and do this until the blood is dead and has stopped flowing from the gallbladder, and keep the patient away from all water for the rest of the day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a full wet cloth and apply it to the mouth of the patient in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not let any cause be left in it and make the water boil for an hour, then another on their hand, where the blood is as if it were water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If we have not forgotten the remedy we recommended earlier, then use camomile or asafoetida through the instrument we recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do that, in which way?
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another method of operation in the fumigation of that is to take an oven in which there are burning coals, and cover the oven with a cover through which there is a hole, and place the end of the instrument in that hole; and then remove the fumigation; and put the patient's mouth on the end of the canula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not lost until you know that the fumigation has reached the lungs, because the lungs are often affected.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if not cured, then repeat the fumigation more frequently, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salted and other foods, and not drinking water, and if necessary, this regimen should be abandoned.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which the bloodletting from the arm is treated when it is visible; it is similar to forceps sometimes, but with some curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which should be placed on the arm, and its end is similar to the beak of a heron, which grasps, in which it is scraped with a razor, so that when any cause is found, it does not leak.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the speech on the treatment and incision of abscesses.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are special kinds of swellings, according to the memories of each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are different in incision and incision of them according to the memories of each one, of which one is for the special kind of abscesses that pierce; and because of this, they understand about the moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the places in which the disease occurs, because the abscess that occurs on the head is different from the abscess that occurs in the buttocks; and the abscess that occurs in the flesh is different from the abscess that occurs in the joint; and to each of them is a judgment for the operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	Moreover, some abscesses that are not punctured before their maturation may cause harm in those places or complications of them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other abscesses that are lanced when they are ripe but not mature according to their time, such as abscesses near joints, when an abscess approaches a joint, it is prolonged within the area where that is located, and often the tissues or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the puncture until it is mature, it will harm the principal member; or it is near the anus, so lance this unripe one; and do not lance any that are not fully ripe, only those that are near the anus, so that it does not cause harm to the area and is prolonged to the parts of the anus, and is made a fistula, or what is made in the term of the abscess that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When you know the time for the puncture of the abscess, it is mature.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know it is mature when the swelling of pain and the cessation of fever, and the decrease in redness and pulse, and the increase in the hardness of the abscess head, and the other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you know the puncture should be made in the location where the abscess is located, and where the pus comes from the source of healing.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should be made quickly through the long bone of the body or the flesh, if the abscesses are in the parts of the legs or feet, and in the locations of the tendons of nerves, of the arches; and at the back, in all equal places where it does not reflect; because in those that reflect, use puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in fleshy places, it is customary to delay the puncture of it until after digestion has been completed according to the complement, as we have said; because if you puncture that denant before, the duration of the pore of it and of its motion is prolonged, and very much the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	May one perforate boils according to the size of the flesh or bone, depending on the need, or according to what the member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And in small boils, apply small perforations, and in large boils, make a large or deep incision according to the variety of their size.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other boils where the core is concave and indented, when it is cut, it is like a certain type of cancer that occurs in the armpits and groin.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that have three sharp angles; and of those that are like the shape of a bull's horn, like the boils in the armpits.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those that are treated with round and crescent-shaped incisions, like those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May the one who does not have any of those that are like shallow boils, apply a shallow incision, or just flatten it.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, do not hesitate to lance it, so that all the pus does not come out at once; instead, remove a part of it, and the next day, remove a larger part, and continue this process gradually until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is very weak, or a woman in labor, or a child, or an old person, or one who is already in a state of decrepitude, since the animal spirit becomes more vulnerable at the exit of the pus, and it is often life-threatening for the patient, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care in this chapter when performing incisions on these abscesses, so that you cleanse the wounds and consider whether the pus from the abscess is sparse, or if it is a flat section; then administer the appropriate medications of oil or of honey; and if the abscess is large, and the incisions are deep, wait until they meet before proceeding.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If a part of the tendon is removed from the abscess or hollowed out where it is located, then cover it with a piece of cloth made of linen or felt, as when you have extracted teeth or roots, its moisture; and strengthen it with a third day; and then proceed to treat that and cure it with the same remedy that cures putrefying wounds until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If you experience bleeding during the operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar in which a piece of linen is soaked, and place that over the location of the bleeding wounds.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, then cover it with a regimen and cure, and powder those that have been recommended in certain locations of this book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the winter time, and the location of the abscess is near nerves, then cover it with powdered vinegar and oil cauteric, and place those over the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer, and the wounds are fleshy, then you should apply ground mustard or vinegar and oil, or vinegar and water, and all of this should be applied within the first day, as we have said, and then you should drain the abscess and clean that area and administer to him what is appropriate for his cure within the first day.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses in general, but according to the method of distinction that I have already mentioned, there are different ways of curing each type of abscess specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	About the incision of abscesses that occur in the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck of the head, small abscesses, and especially those that contain tunics that are at their own level; and their species are their own.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are pointed, and from those that contain moisture similar to honey.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those that contain moisture similar to salt and vinegar; and from those that are hard, like stones.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In the section of all, and in the extraction of those, one should not fear, as it does not create an obstacle to the extraction of those.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation in the section of those is that you use an instrument in the shape of which it approaches the area, which is called entromes, as long as you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If that which contains is moisture, then split that instrument along its length by section on the surface in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin at the section of the line B up to the line G. Then, as the moisture is evacuated, you scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, because too many troops returned, if there is any cause from that.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then submerge it in Egyptian mummy, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that place and leave it for another day, because that liquid corrodes all that which has come from that layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeat the procedure on the other side with Egyptian cotton, thoroughly and carefully if necessary, until you are confident that there is no cause for that rash; then cure the ailment with Egyptian cotton until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you insert this second one in this way:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a sharp incision in the shape of a cross, and then insert it between two lips of the incision and scrape all the parts of that tunic, and strive with your skill to extract the tunic that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your tool causes discomfort, then do what I told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Similarly, perform the same procedure on the abscess with incision and healing according to what we have told you; an incision over a pus-filled abscess is less painful, because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Some people have such frequent abscesses on their heads that they are never dry; the cause is that you incised over an abscess on the head of an old woman and then squeezed the abscess like a deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be washed, and if anyone touched it, they would be afflicted with it.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other abscesses on the head or in this chapter, this is not about this chapter, as with abscesses that come to the heads of children and must be explained by the reasons for the hollows, but the section of all these should be a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the perforation of those from the lower part of them to prevent the sanies from flowing to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And apply that which is appropriate for that of healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	About the section of scrofula, which occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses occur in the neck and in the armpits and in the elbows; and some occur in the other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and some of which are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is within their own tunic, and as with the nodes and abscess of the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The specific types of these scrofulous swellings are boils, some of which are hard, and some of which contain moisture, and some of which are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in the one that you see in good position at the Touchment, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the codena, and is dry throughout, and is not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not stuck, so that you incise it from above the surface of the part forward and backward along the line of .G. within the line of .B., and remove that from all parts, and extend two lips of the codena over the opening, or with cotton if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	It is even more important that the vein or nerve is not incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And if the space is not sharp, that it does not adjust your hand to the incision, or that it disturbs the patient, and that you do not incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised a vein or an artery and prohibited from your operation, then pause in the place of the vinegar trissat or other powders that remain fluid of sane, and clean the place, and let that which is inside where it pauses the acuity of the abscess and the space becomes soft and begins to be pus-like.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the bone is removed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation before you complete it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then examine the other parts of the body to see if there is any cause of the other small scrofula, so incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large vein, cover it immediately that you do not incise that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before covering, make sure it is very thick and let it fall through itself to avoid harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then complete the wound with old goose fat, which you have already immersed in Egyptian oil, and care for that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that scrofula completely, cover it immediately that you adjust the two lips of the wound and cause a little pus so that there is no excess.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess due to the greatness of the scrofula, cover it immediately and then incise its root and apply suture and that which is called.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And in the case of scrophulous swellings that contain moisture, make a superficial puncture at this location where it appears to you to be maturing, and pause the puncture if it reaches the deepest part of the tissue, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the puncture with a sharp instrument and similar to those, so that it corrodes what is left of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound is already cleaned, then you cure that sharp instrument of flesh generated until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the drying of the core of an accidental abscess in the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients used this method in the abscess, and I have not seen any man in our land who did that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of that speech.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men who have curvature, the curve should be avoided in the extraction of the abscess, because it cannot be done well for that reason, since all the veins and major parts of the patient are there.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	When there are abscesses in the mouth or throat or two boils, when the disease is not in the gums, cut off the section of the epiploon to prevent the loss that is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do that, we cut off three or four small sections of the epiploon, depending on the thickness in the area between two circles for quantity, which is in the cartilage, and this location is appropriate for sectioning, which is private of flesh and the vessels of sinew from it are yellow.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is afraid, then extend the tongue of the throat to the side, and then cut the tongue until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of sinew if there is any cause from those.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the liver second, as we have recommended; and it is significant over the section of the canal through the flaccidity which is from that and for the opening of the wound.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then, when the hour comes in which that puncture is feared, add two strips of the bandage of the wound, and place it alone on the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh not decay until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the summary of the speech we have recommended is only that you see that if those apostemas have already been opened, the patient will die, and his breath is stopped, and they will incise the epiglottis so that he can breathe over the location of the wound for some time, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that reason, the wound should remain open until the poison of the disease is consumed; and that poison lasts for three days; and therefore, in this way, commander, you should leave the wound open until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And that which I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant held a knife and inserted part of the cane of the lung, and she was called to heal it, and she atrophied the muscle as if it were the mugit of the dead, and discovered the wound and atrophied the scar which was on the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, it was confessed that at that time there had been no incision of the vein or insertion of a guide, and the wind was from the wound, and it was cured by that fire.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if the servant did not faint in the mouth, and then return to the better disposition of his conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now I say that in the section of the epiploon there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	About the incision over the abscess that occurred in the groin, and it is called groin hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess named groin hernia is an abscess of the second color of the body, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one there is no cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one occurs in two ways, one of which is similar to large nodes, and the other way is abscess that is caused by the compression of an artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not assume that you can do it with a knife unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine that wound and investigate it, and if you find something similar to a grain, and it is not hanging from any of the veins, then insert that which is there with the nodes, and extract that which contains the pus and bursa; and if not, then examine the entire area, and cure the wound with whatever you believe will heal it before it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the separation of the species of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes, there are several species that I have already mentioned all their species in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you should understand the difference between a node and an abscess when making a diagnosis.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, you should say that an abscess is heat and fever and severe pain until the boiling of the excess stops; and it is a putrefaction that ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	If there is no heat or fever or pain, and if that child is the one who is usually in the cradle.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And if the second color of the body is such that its beginning is like a cyst and is made thus, whether larger or smaller, and they are second to two species, one being fat and containing moisture, and the colors of moisture are mottled, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you have reached the cure of that child, examine him and inquire about that instrument which is called an introducer, according to its form, which is as follows:
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is useful for the investigation of abscesses and all nodes, and you should take this instrument and introduce it into the most humid place where you find the abscess, and you will rotate its tips little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the cavity.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then place your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and extract the introducer and consider what is found in its traces.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the current moisture is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you insert a dry superficial section as I have mentioned in the other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is no moisture in the footprints of the insertion, then you know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And apply a dry section in the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you were taught, suspend that one with an incision, and exfoliate the codex from all parts to facilitate, and keep the skin or bag, if possible, over that one and remove that pus from the wound.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to remove that skin, and then you should wait until that one does not remain for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If it remains for any reason, too much or too little, then the wound should be returned as best as possible.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some small part of it remains, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place your hand over that which is the seat of the abscess cautiously, and cure that from the other cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is necessary to remove a large stone, then use your hands to grasp that which contains it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the pulse is opposite or not, then use a probe to insert three threads that are made of silver and leave them in place for two days or three until the pain subsides and the inflammation decreases; then return to cutting away that which remains.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those that are in the forms of probes, and of three kinds, one being large, one being medium, and one being small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large probe is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium probe is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small probe is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	It should be made of iron, smooth, with rounded ends, so that the instrument does not cause harm to the tissues.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the punctures, and they are named albered, and one of them is called bridle.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And of three spices, one is large, mace and pepper.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great lake, its shape:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the large mace, its shape:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small pepper, its shape:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is convenient for those abscesses and exits and fistulas and boils that are between the bones and of other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they make needles, large lions, as with great golden needles that are sewn into the sutures, and are made of gold, or of silver, or of iron, and the best are when they are made of gold.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they make the needles of black pitch, which are like those that for those are opened the fistulas in the cavity of which are reflections, which are reflected by their light on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of three spices, one is long, and the others are mace, and the others are short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of its stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the great experiment of the plague:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the lesser experiment of the plague:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the small experiment of the plague:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the bones are of special types, namely those that are simple, which have only one curve, and there are three types: large, medium, and small.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they also have their own curves, and there are three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those that have two curves, there are three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those that have three curves, there are three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large simple bone, its shape:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a small simple bone:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a medium-sized simple bone, its shape:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of a large curved bone:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of a small curved bone, its shape:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a medium-sized curved bone, its shape:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a large bone with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a nail has two curved parts:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of a small nail has two curved parts:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a large nail has three curved parts:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a medium-sized nail has three curved parts:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a small nail has three curved parts:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the surgical knives that are sharp and cut nodes and abscesses, and they come in three kinds, namely large, medium-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	The shape of a large surgical knife:
Forma del scapel migier:	The shape of a medium-sized surgical knife:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The shape of a small surgical knife:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The edges of those that are made by cutting are sharp, and the other edges are not sharp, but they are not made in such a way that they can be used to scrape away the beginning of a vein or nerve, and for these they are used to heal the patient and bring him peace through a small incision, which is necessary for the scraping away of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the shapes of almonds, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of a large almond:
Forma de magda migier:	The shape of a medium-sized almond:
Forma de magda pauc:	The shape of a small almond:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	These are the shapes of eggs and their similarities to rays, which is made into alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the outer layer that the punctured spot is hidden and in that place, according to the parts you want, as you can see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of spatulas, which are hidden between the mentioned punctures for the opening of abscesses and do not pierce the patients, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the shapes of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of those: which are cut off from the flow of the blood, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; the shapes of which are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	These are the shapes of eggs, round in some cases and thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And make sure that these types of breezes are strong and few, so that for those who need to expel blood quickly, they can do so with velocity, and later when you first begin, there is no medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use these to abscess blood in every part of the body, and only use them in fleshy places, such as on the backs of the thighs, and on the chest, and on the breasts, and on the belly, and on the groin, and similar to those fleshy parts.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some veins are made of these other tools, similar to lancets, in this form; through which the blood is expelled when it is done by phlebotomy, or you must begin from a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some veins are made round in this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the treatment of male breasts that are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some women inflate their breasts with air to enhance their appearance as they begin to lose their youthful fullness, and then deflate the inflated breasts, assemble the sagging breasts of women, and apply them far away.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to those who apply that, cut those lunar-shaped amulets according to this shape, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then remove the entire scab, place the ointment on the wound, adjust the edges of the wound with a matching bandage, and cure that before it becomes healthy.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the breast declines to the parts behind and is softened by its own weight, as it often happens to women, then cut it into two parts, similar to lunar shapes, each containing the other at the tip of each, so that the longer line contains the shorter one according to this form of the line of .B. and the line of .G. Then remove the scab that is between the edges of the wound, eliminate the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary for healing before it becomes healthy.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the initial incision as required by the patient's uneasiness and bleeding, then cover the wound with a cloth soaked in corrosive liquid and leave it to be eaten away by that which is like a leech, and then cure the area where it has been eaten away.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	About the puncturing of abscesses that come from the breasts.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from the breasts are of the species of scrofulous, hard ones, which contain a pus.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain moisture, some are incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And as soon as all that is in the abscess is evacuated, then you close it with stitches and leave it until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And as soon as the wound is closed, it should be treated with an appropriate liquid until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the glands under the armpits and the scrofulous ones is present, then you should lance them as we have described in the section on scrofula equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague is extended to an area that cannot be reached by a lancet, then administer the cautery according to what we have said in that case.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the incision of abscesses that occur by puncture or by vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the puncture is broken, and the skin over it is consolidated, then abscesses and signs occur by which inflammation and abscess are known to be caused by artery or vein: because when the abscess is by puncture, it is longer attached to the front of the body; and that when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a noise in the area.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is by vein is round like the belly.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And incision over this abscess is wrong, and especially in those that are near the armpits, and in the elbows, and in the back, and in many places of the body; and it is great, therefore be careful that its treatment is avoided, and that which is on the outside, or on the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Over the affected area, which is their own due to inflammation of the orifice of the archery, cut through the dry section in the long; and then remove the section with tweezers and remove the archery, and remove the tunics within which it is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place the needle on that side and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the archery with a double fold in two places, — which causes you to have seen in extraction of two archeries that were in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then push the area between two limbs apart by an inch and a half into which the swelling is completely within it, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which pus is generated within it until the limbs fall; and then cure that with suitable remedies to that until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is due to the section of the vein, then make sure you have your hand on that which is at your possible distance from the abscess and the cut, and then introduce the needle behind the area where you had your hand, and make it penetrate; and then double it in that thread until you remove the other side, and then tie the abscess with a string according to what I have told you in the thread of two parts of two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you are afraid of puncturing the skin, then insert the needle at an angle to the entire abscess from the beginning of the needle, and strengthen the four threads in different places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess at the middle place of the patient before he lies down, so that when he lies down with that, you insert the excess of the bandage, and leave what is left from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place the cushion that you have soaked in wine and oil on him, and then administer the cure that is made with garlic and onions until he is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Such as abscess in the arc and in the vein, and similarly abscess in the nerves when it occurs due to their impact or excessive work, and so on.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made in the most painful places of the helpers or the heel, or in any place where there are many joints.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	When the abscess is large and resembles the color of the other body, and it is in the upper part of the leg, and when it is pressed with force, the patient feels a similar shock as if struck by lightning.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And the abscess is not attached to the front of the body, and for this reason it is left untreated, and it spreads throughout the entire body and does not go towards the front or back.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those who have it at the joints should not be pierced with iron, as it may cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But those who have it on the head or forehead should use a needle.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then use forceps and remove the one from the root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then hang it with an umbilical cord, and scrape it, and remove it; and place the wound on a bandage, and cure it before it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	About the rupture of an abscess that occurs in the mouth and also in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	When the male genitalia are swollen in the bellies of those who have them and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal due to their similarity to mushrooms, with a subtle head and a large base; and their labia are already open, and they are from those who are small, and they are from those who are very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in his belly were two parts that were more like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, of smaller size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And their labia were turned inside out and they were deformed, and moisture ran from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I inserted those and again in one foot, eighteen unciae, and the other, sixteen unciae.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation at the insertion of theirs is that you consider whether the patient is wet, and the color of the thigh is white, wet, of subtle size; then you insert it with a spatula, and in your presence cauterize it in the fire, because swollen parts of it are expelled by drying; and if you find the dry, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If you see the patient is weak and afraid, first take a sharp knife; then later take a recent blood clot, strengthen that wound, the one we have mentioned; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust it in the structure of the blood clot; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the large wound in the thigh until it is completely removed and falls off on its own.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	However, if the thigh is of great size, then there may be some cause for fear and terror, especially in one that is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	However, it is possible that you incise the abdomen of the patient, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then care for it until it is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to incise the thigh that is dark in color, has little feeling, and is regularly shaped, as that is cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you will remember this for future reference.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the cure of the abdominal area.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The abdominal area is affected by various causes; either by fissures of the navel which are on the stomach, and from there the intestine or hernia comes out according to what is mentioned in other ruptures; or by ulcers which flow with blood or with an artery according to what is called this, or by constricted ventosity in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is by fissure of the navel and by protrusion of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is lion's pain, and appears in different positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is by protrusion of the intestine, then the position of that one is towards that which we have mentioned, with greater diversity, and when you press that one with the fingers as indicated, it disappears, and then return; and very often it is towards that, and it is a magnificent sign that the intestine must be introduced and great labor.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is by moisture, then it is lion's pain and does not disappear when you press your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it cracked.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is for abscess, then use these signs to locate the pus declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is for meat, then use these signs to locate the abscess, which is large, hard, and fixed in place.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is for swelling, then use these signs to locate the touch of it, which is like a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is considered as follows: whether the prominence of the navel is due to abscess from artery, vein, or swelling; then it should be prohibited from treatment, because in that case there is fear and panic as you were taught in the chapter where he mentioned the abscesses from artery and vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to hernia or skin, then command the patient to hold their own hand, and be standing extended; and then use a probe in the entire circumference of the umbilicus, and command that it be held between your hands on the sieu dos, and then wrap the space lat around the circuit of the umbilicus over the location you have previously marked with the tent; and then extend the margin of the abscess to the parts above the ankle; and then apply a firm or gentle knot and the method of tying the ligature.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then approach the abscess with a sponge extended over the skin and introduce the pointed instrument into that point and try to draw out the intestine; and if you have not done so before or do not protect it with the skin, then remove the pus and push the intestine to the parts of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the skin, then take that needle and scrape off the excess of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is against your arc or vein, then circle that point, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two fields strong and introduce two needles around the abscess in the manner of a cross, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and let the place where the flesh extends and falls out; or scrape that which becomes thin and seeps, and then heal that which covers the mouth with water inside that it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the prominence of the navel is made of flesh and there is no pus or moisture in it, then cover it as we have said and remove the pus or the moisture that is in it, and then care for that wound with something that covers and heals it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 43.
De curacio de cranc.	About the cure of the neck.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have said, in the division, about the neck and how to cure it with medicine, and that it is necessary to be careful in its cure so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that the neck generates in the most and greatest care of its cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancients said that some neck wounds are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, such as a wound on the neck that is in the mamillas or on the cushion and similar to the members allocated to stray all of that, and more so when they begin small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, do not cover it yourself, because I have not seen any other that can heal from that or has reached that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation is performed as we have said, by preceding and laying the patient down, and purging them of black bile for some time, and then stitching it up, if found to be manifest bleeding.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation, and prohibit them from eating anything that could cause any of the reasons for the operation. And then examine everything thoroughly until there is no cause for the operation.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not stop it in that way, and express the places, and wipe off the blood completely with your hand or with an instrument that is as clean as possible among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you find resistance of heavy bleeding from the vein or artery, then cauterize it while the blood flow is still going on, and then care for it with another method until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 44
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure of hydropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the division, of the species of hydropathy of water, and the symptoms of each species, of its cure with our medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by iron is not just the species of althitas alone, and it is not approximated to the species of timpanists or the species of hypostasis, because that is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this species of hydropathy timpanist with your medicines and do not compare your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already been weakened, or is another patient with another hydropathy, such as if it is in the throat or stomach and similar to those, then be careful not to treat it with iron, because there is fear about it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient of great virtue, and it is not another disease but hydropathy only, and not in infants or the elderly, then the method of the operation for that is that you lift the patient between your hands, and give them water to the exact part of their belly with their hand, pushing the water to the part behind the navel, and then take a sponge according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Should be two sharp points long, from the sharp end with a spatula; but rather should be in some shortness little by little, so that in the operation that one does not pass into the intestine, and that it does not tear that one.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider whether the generation of hydrocele is from the intestines, because it is customarily believed that you have the section along the abdomen for the amount of three fingers behind it, on the right side of it over the peritoneum.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydrocele is due to a defect in the diaphragm, then your section should be on the left side of the umbilicus for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of that one is due to the left side, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not let your section be on the side on which you want to place the patient so that the excess does not flow to that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then perforate with the instrument all the capsule, and enter into that section, and raise your hand between the capsule and the syphac, and you excise that one; and if the amount of one nail or approximately.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then, approach and pierce the skin until it reaches the space where the water is located.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then, extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or of thin iron, to which at the lowest part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and it is made at its tip incised according to the manner of a pen, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper part of it is a ring, which when the instrument reaches the water, then slightly above the instrument, and thus evacuate the water in small quantities, because if you evacuate from there too much, very often the patient dies from the resolution of their spirit animal, or accidents occur to them that are approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Do not evacuate from there according to the quantity of the water and according to what means to you the dispositions of the patient regarding the benefit of their leg and their good.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and release the liquid that causes this, which is usually held back by the cord that you recommended to cut in order to pierce that second one with that method.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the process on the other side if the patient tolerates it, and remove a small amount of liquid each time, and do this for several days until the danger passes, and be careful not to let too much of the liquid out.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	However, if you are worried about the patient and let out a large amount of liquid, then treat that area with a burial in sand and a poultice made of bread dough, and expose it to sunlight for a long time; and treat that area with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize the stomach, and the muscle and the skin around it as soon as you have finished removing the liquid, following the method that I previously mentioned.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the treatment of children who are born without a natural opening for urine.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some children are born from the womb of their mother with the head of their umbilical cord not pierced (or it is straight or it is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, carefully pierce the umbilical cord as soon as it is born with a thin needle according to this form.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then place a thin nail with a thick head on it and tie it for three days or fourteen days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they want to urinate, remove it; and then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not place the head, it is possible that the urine that passes over the area does not clean this wound.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	And if the one who was tied is straight, it should be treated with a nail as we have said, for three days until it is healed.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	And if the one who was tied is not in its place, it causes a fistula, which is because of those who are born and the umbilical cord is not in its place so that they cannot urinate to the parts below, until the umbilical cord raises the umbilical cord to the parts above; and it is not at birth, because then the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and it is a malady due to a lack of nutrition.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of operation in this case is that the patient should be placed on their back, and then extend the head of the knife towards the left hand of the operator, and insert the point of the knife into the second incision, as if writing with a pen, or so that no part is torn, so that the edge of the knife resembles the edge of the knife and that the tissue falls into the second incision after the operation.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation for the flow of blood, four matters can go wrong with this; and pause at that point where you remove the pus, and cure the wound before it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 66.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the white substance that occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis and on the glans, and black and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Four matters can go wrong with this white substance in the penis and its prominence of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, cover it with a thin ointment and remove the one that completely covers that area; then place your hand over that part that is submerged in the Egyptian oil; and apply that, cure it with the ointment that is applied daily until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the tumor is malignant, apply a red-colored ointment, then cover it with a cotton pad at the beginning and end of the tumor.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the tumor is on the prepuce of the penis of an uncircumcised man, and one part of the tumor is inside the prepuce and the other part is deformed, then cover it with the one that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; and now you cure that deformity, because when you cure it along with the prepuce, it is not guaranteed that it will not become cancerous.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if you have experienced accidents in the genitalia and in the black and curly prepuce, then cover everything that has already been damaged and is about to be corrupted or that has already been corrupted; and apply linen cloths over it with honey, which is beaten with wheat flour from millet, and with vinegar and cinnamon.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then care for that wound until it heals.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	However, if there is bleeding from the wound, then administer silver nitrate in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	a silver nitrate cautery is placed at two positions together, and is applied to the bleeding area and the wound when it becomes corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is eroded and destroyed completely in an hour, then you should insert a bladder catheter into the opening of the foreskin to allow the patient to urinate through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin at the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur unless the foreskin is known, and it is not required to be circumcised; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess) then you should excise the blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely free.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove those very carefully, then you should excise the spatula from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and when the foreskin is thin, it is easily punctured by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then gently separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a sharp instrument, which is already moistened in water to prevent other bacteria from adhering.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then apply a styptic agent until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the cleaning of children and the treatment of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution of continuity as with other plagues: rather, it is our operation and our will, and it is particularly in children that it is necessary to assign the best operation and the most humane way to prevent loss of life.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, we say that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of the free men, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experiment, which causes me to have at this time the majority of the artisans and barbers to use circumcision and cleaning with a knife and with a file; and they use thread and a needle.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already done all these methods and never seen a better method for circumcision than with the bistoury, the ligature that is used in surgery like a nail, which moves the foreskin from above, where the foreskin is attached to two layers, and the layer underneath is pulled out, and if it is forced at another point and causes certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the circumcision that is done for the alpaca, and digital, of which blacksmiths use, is not secure at the end of the male member, because it often goes into the wound of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation, a nail, if it is forced, will ruin your operation and make it worse.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The foreskin of the child is short by nature, and if it is stretched in such a way that it does not need circumcision, I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Moreover, the circumcision that is done with bistouries and ligatures and the nail, which I have experienced for myself, because the bistouries are of proportional length, so that the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; and therefore, as you press your hand on two sharps, and incisions are made at one time, it is a compression of the nail in the shape containing the foreskin of the penis from all parts, which does not make any mistake of all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The first step in the operation is that you make the child comfortable, especially if it is one of those who understands only a little, and do not do anything else but lie him on his back, and let him rest until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then do everything possible to make him understand that situation.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Then make him understand that he is between your hands and do not let him see the forceps; hide them in your hand or behind his back, so that the child does not see those or any other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then place your hand on his back and blow into the mouth, and pull out whatever is in his mouth, and modify that which is added to it from deafness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then place the location indicated by the sign on his back, and put a small second bandage under it, and then tie the end of that bandage to the good retention, and insert it between two bandages.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the lid slightly and examine the head of the wound; and then gently lay the small pieces of cloth over it, which is better; and place powder on top of the powder and cover it with a cloth in which is spread mugwort oil mixed with recently boiled rosewater; and let that be done on the other side; and cure it with that cure until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for molding, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The outer ones are not sharp and the others are sharp, so that the handle of the clamp is not cut off, and the length of the two blades should be equal to the length of two handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in molding is that too much force is used to push the intrinsic lid entirely or partially out of its place.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, be careful when you extend that of your hour at the tip of your finger to the abscess in the area and that you insert it with equal depth.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a hook and insert it there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if it has been there for three days and is swollen with pus behind the ear, then let that out carefully, excoriate that area, and insert the second one that you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful not to touch that area with your hand.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then heal that area with the powders that we have mentioned in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is inserted too deeply and you cannot see it, then do not try to remove it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But heal that area once it has become healthy.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Urine retention in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or a congealed substance, or by poison or flesh, and similarly to those of which we have spoken about the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and you see retention of it being due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then make sure the patient is lying on their back.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the feet of that person on their own bed and extend their abdomen from the part below their back, and the patient should tightly hold their breath as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is pressed to expel the stone from the back parts, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if that substance is not dissolved and is causing great pain to the patient, then make sure you administer extraction of it with an instrument called a siringua, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and have a thin lion's tongue, like a pen needle in its thinness. At the end of it, there is a thin silver needle that resembles a palm leaf and is similar to a small finger, at the tip of which there is a thin silver needle.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of extracting urine from that person is to take a thin, long, and flexible silver needle and wrap it in wool or cotton for good adhesion; then insert the ends of the silver needle into the part below the siringua, and if there are any superfluous folds of the wool, do not introduce them into the canula with great force. Instead, introduce the end of the canula into the bladder gently.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And perform acupuncture on the patient over the affected area, and apply a warm cloth to their back and neck, using oil of olive and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the catheter to facilitate its passage until it reaches the base of the neck; and then bend the catheter over to the side of the abdomen; and then insert the catheter through that until it reaches the bladder, and then remove the catheter when the cause of the patient's illness has been reached, and not do this in reverse order, as it would cause harm.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then gradually extend the cloth over the patient, as the urine soaks the cloth.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then remove that and perform treatment for urine, using a catheter, do not cease doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient is again relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 99.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	About the catheterization of the bladder using a clamp and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or it is filled with pus in that area, or it is constricted by a hardness, and you want to drain fluids and medications from there, then use the instrument called the clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but if it is closed on the outside, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that case, there are three ways: two from one side, as often as possible.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning, there is a cavity, in which that which is contained is placed, and it should be as much as possible, its addition, until when any cause is drawn from that place, it should be drawn out, and when it is expelled, the liquid should be drawn out, and when it is expelled long, according to what the clampcedra does in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to draw out fluids from the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the liquid, and draw that liquid which is contained in the compartments above, because the liquid is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the external catheter in the urethra according to what we have recommended in the circumcision; and then apply moisture with that water, which moisture penetrates into the bladder soon, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the catheter that is used when the bladder is catheterized, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or laton, of which the tip is similar to a small feather, and then its canal is inserted into the urethra.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder in motion, and place it on the water that you want to catheterize into the bladder, and then tie it strongly with a double thread, and boil that water over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the external end of the catheter into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand on the bladder with the water that has already reached the bladder, so that the patient feels it.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not see the bladder, then take a spoon of parchment and make a circle from it; and perforate it throughout its entire thickness; and then insert it strongly into those places, as it is turned; and then add the circle where it was also added, so that you can place it in that water that you want to use for catheterization, and observe and watch.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then approach that one with the instrument and do as you did with the bladder, and express urine from your hand into the bladder when moisture reaches it.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the kinds of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones that form in the kidneys and stones that form in the bladder, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the stone in which lithotomy is performed, and section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone that forms in the bladder itself is the one that remains in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will describe it with an obvious and brief exposure.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, stones that form in the bladder mainly occur in children; and among their symptoms is that the urine that is excreted from the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels pain in the lower abdomen, and it is treated with that.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is the salvation of children who have reached fourteen years old; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In the young, it may be due to that which is between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that from which the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is few, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we reach the cure of that, cover the beginning of that which they call christening the stone, which removes all the fissure that is in his intestines; for that fissure sometimes prevents the formation of the stone through investigation of it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then press the stone against his feet and be careful and gently push it down so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it falls out of some fissures.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that cushion between your hands prepared, and the hands of it should be placed on the patient's abdomen, so that the bladder is completely made to incline towards the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then approach that and all of that deformed part.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel a stone in the space, then first cut open that section of it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you cannot cut all of it from the inside, then cover that part with oil and place your left hand on the patient's left side, if the patient is a child, or their right side if they are an adult, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And then approach that part which is inside the stone.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually insert it into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that part and expel it from the deformed parts to the place where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press on the bladder with his left hand; and command another minister to extend his right hand over the deformed parts, and his left hand to remain behind the catheter, which is placed above the thighs, in the part where you made the incision.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert the instrument with this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And split it in the place between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle, towards the left side of the cushion; and let the incision be over the stone and the part in the buttock, and make a transverse incision, so that the incision is wide and tight according to the quantity that the stone requires there, and not more, because if the stone is too large it will not fit into the incision.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you should know that there is a stone with a sharp edge and margins, so the exit of it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that stone there is a lion-like glans, and it is round, and it is made of the same material and exit.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is to that one with sharp edges and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not already removed, then carefully force or twist that one, or handle it decently with a tool of appropriate shape, the end of which should be like a file, and do not leave it behind; or you can insert something subtle and curved from behind.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot reach that one, then expand the wound slightly, and if you want to stop the flow of blood, cut away the strength of that one with a three-cornered piece of glass.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you push the stone into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it inside; and then push a little more of that; and similarly do if they are two or more.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is known that you should insert that one with great care, because it causes the patient two main problems: either they cannot hold their urine continuously, or they become dependent on it, as the place is not completely solidified.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Instead of administering expulsion of that one before it is forgotten, or engineering in the break of that one with the forceps inside that extracts that one in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with powder of aloe and blood of dragon, and apply that one.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	Pause over that cloth soaked in oil or in oil and vinegar, or in water and vinegar, to prevent the pus from spreading.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then place the patient on their back on the bed, and do not let them sit up until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When those fevers pass, rub the area with water and oil, and cure it with an anti-inflammatory and an anti-diarrheal before it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If in the fever an abscess is formed, adhesive and corrosive, and if there are similar symptoms as if the pus is in the bladder congealed, and if this is the case, then enter a catheter into the urethra and extract that pus, because it can cause the bladder to perforate and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with vinegar and water and salt, and apply a poultice of all kinds, and apply what is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover the entire duration of treatment, place medicines on the affected area and adjust them as needed.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the bladder, and it is fixed there, and urination is prohibited, then cure that with which you recommended that it reach the stage of disintegration; for too many troops have been used for this treatment and are accused of being drying out. And I have already extracted that, and it is that you take a needle made of iron, of which this is its shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extraction, sharp, fixed in the butt.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a sieve and place it under the bladder to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the bladder, perforating it until the needle reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then rotate the needle in that small stone little by little, and you will break through it until you make the other side penetrate; for the urine is already released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then place your hand on that which is called the stone of the glans penis, where it is usually pierced, and through which urine is passed, and the patient is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	However, if this cure is not possible for some reason that prevents you from doing so, then place two fingers under the stone and two fingers on top of the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then press on the stone in that glans penis between two grooves.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then remove the membrane and modify the sinew with a warm compress, which is made in the affected area.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to place two fingers under the stone, but rather to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other finger above should not be placed, because when the finger is removed from the edge of the stone, the catheter returns to its place and takes the infection.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that, you need to lift the catheter when you place the finger above, either by raising it to the parts above or by returning it to its original position and taking the infection as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of extracting stones from women's kidneys.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women's kidneys do not occur often.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	However, if you see a stone in one of them, the cure is difficult and it is forbidden by too many hands.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of their methods is to make the woman lie on her back.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second method is to find a woman who is very wise and knows if the doctor has cast a spell on her or not, whether she has had many husbands or not.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third method is to find a woman who is very wise and knows this art, mainly the operation with fire.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth method is that the incision over the stone in women's kidneys is longer than the length of the stone, so it is necessary to make an incision beforehand, and in that place there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	However, if you have to do that, then make sure you get a very wise woman who is not easily found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you do not have that one, then seek a skilled and subtle physician, or present a well-educated married woman who knows how to perform this art, or a woman who has partaken in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then make that one do everything you command them to do, from the inquiry about the stone until the beginning; this is because it is necessary to check if the woman is a virgin, then cover that which is said to be in her buttocks and remove the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find that one, cover her with that which is said to be in her buttocks, and then command her to inscribe over it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	Then if she is not a virgin, command the married woman to insert that which is said to be in her buttocks into the cavity of the patient and inquire about the stone, placing her left hand on the bladder, and examine it well.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you find that one, gradually uncover that which is said to be in the orifice of the bladder from the parts behind until it reaches the other at the bottom of the cavity.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then approach the position of the neck of the devil and place the tip of the knife in any part that is at his stop and center the stone in that part, and the stone should not remain covered by the flesh after it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the saw on that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity that is known to be cut from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you know that the types of stones are small: one of those is small and large, sharp and long, round and having ramps.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you know how many types there are of those for what you mean about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to extract blood, adjust in the position of the vein triceps and that for an hour until it is abscised, and then return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you prepare your tools with those that are said in the extraction of stones in men, so that you will be helped by those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you want to expel phlegm and know that the expulsion of phlegm is from the arc that is embedded, then place powder on the area and strengthen those lumps and structure descending, and do not repeat that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because it would likely kill the patient.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And treat the infection.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore, when the intensity of phlegm decreases and the wound heals, then return to your operation until the stone is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of incision on inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An inguinal hernia is not other than the accumulation of moisture in the white sheath that contains the testicles, which is called the scrotum.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some of them are in the same sheath that nature has prepared in the part of the testicles, until it becomes another testicle; and this is the sheath of the testicle between the white sheath that we have said, and it is not other than a scrotum.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakening of the muscles, which occurs in the groin area, as this matter accumulates in that area, and some cases occur due to trauma caused by a blow to the groin.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has various colors, such as yellow, orange, red, black, or gray, and is the most common one.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the symptoms by which one can recognize this water accumulation are: if it is in the white swelling that we have mentioned, then the abscess gradually changes its shape to resemble a hen's egg, and appears in the groin area, as the humidity affects all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the thigh, then the abscess gradually changes its shape to resemble half of an egg, and it is estimated by some that it is another egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the groin and the white swelling, then it is felt as pressure.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the humor in the abscess, you extract the color of the humor from the pus that is inside it; and if there is any residue in the wound, judge by that which is in the pus.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of this iron, first ask the patient if he is allergic to it, and sometimes examine the contents of his mouth.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then lie him on his back on some reason, and place something underneath him to support his body.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then place yourself on the left side of him, and ask the assistant to follow on his right, who extends his hand to one of two lengths to the groin and the part of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a thin knife and cut the groin of the thigh from the inside to the length between the two tendons.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the incision straight and equally distant from the line that should be on the thighs, until it reaches the white bone that contains it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Expel that one, observe, and guard yourself so that you do not injure him; and your exorcism should be gentle and subtly scrutinized according to the amount possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then approach the phial filled with water and pierce it widely, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate between two lips of the section am uncis, and extend the phial to the parts above; and do not touch the cord with the genitals contained, and insert the phial in that way that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Then insert him into the whole or in the feet, and more subtly his latz, because if you do not scrutinize the insertion of him exquisitely, it is not secure that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the wound proceeds from that detachment of his cord in the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the phial, return and adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitals with a stitch, and care for him as with the other wounds until he is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If the abdomen is corrupted by another illness, then cover the veins that are supporting the suspensor, extract the abdomen, and care for that which we have said about it.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the water is added in two equal parts, then you will know that those are hernias; therefore, insert that part which you have done on the other equally; and if it is to your sight that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you will clean the wound, and insert it into the sections of wool submerged in oil or rose oil; and place another piece of wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and expand it over two gentians and the mirror of the belly; and place cloths and powders on top of them, and tie those with a cloth that is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then place two cloths and fold them with wool according to this form; and make the edges of the cloths that are pressed from cotton or damp wool, and attach them to the structure in the belt of the pants, and one of the edges is held by the buttocks inside the two, and the second is held at the part of the underwear, and two other edges on top of two cushions and two other edges on top of two buttocks, and all the structure should be adjusted in the belt of the pants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a pointed cautery instead of natural separation; and you should take a thin, pointed cautery and insert it into the groove of the ginitius, and ignite it according to what we have recommended before that the white cipher containing the water be discovered, and then you take the cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that cipher, and ignite it inside until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then stretch the cipher with your fingers, and excoriate with your fingers, and excoriate with a thin, pointed cautery ignited; and insert it according to what is possible inside that you eliminate everything; and guard yourself from the heat that the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and longer lasting than the operation of separation.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter resistance to the abscess in the hour of separation or ignition, or flow of pus, then you should cure what resistance it causes to you for that, according to the treatment that is appropriate at that time.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is too weak, and does not want to undergo the second operation due to its horror, then administer a sedative as recommended; and when you are certain that this hernia is dangerous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then make the patient lie on some elevated bed, approach the abscess in the lowest part of their stomach, and place the incision according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And make the incision wide enough to drain all the pus.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the wound and hold it there, so that the pus continuously drains out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And care for them until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if the patient is unable to tolerate the drainage of the wound at that time, then do not make an incision except for a small one in the opening of the wound that causes irritation and prevents the exit of the pus, as follows; or adjust a small instrument in the pressure of the wound to remove the pus from the drops, the shape of which is preceded.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	When the water returns, and it is expelled after several months or in the environment around it; and when it is expelled, then it should be punctured according to that manual method, where the patient has passed their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	About incision over hernia flesh and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the incision over this hernia there is a risk of perforation in the major structures; therefore, it is best to dismiss it and be saved by that method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation in that place and the species of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, say that the abscesses do not occur in those parts where the muscles are connected and it is made due to various causes: either by excessive acute pain, which is found in the muscles, or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the part, and it is not black in the pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And if the abscess is heavily inflamed, its color is dark, and it does not feel hot to the touch.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some wounds are made by the puncture of the acetabula, and by the inflammation of those that already exist, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	This is known as an abscess caused by the inflammation of the acetabula when it is felt with the finger and does not feel hot.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	This is not an abscess caused by the inflammation of veins, as it does not have any known cause for compression with the finger.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that this section and others are made on the body; you should insert the cord of the genetius, and then place the hook at the parts above, and extract that from the white bone, and remove the suspenders of the veins, and tie them, and insert the suspenders as much as you remove all the parts of the hook.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the hook is already attached to those fleshy parts, then you should remove the hook and insert that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is adhesion due to some cause of the intestine, or between those that are between the buttocks, then you should remove all that adhesion and incise it at the round beginning.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	However, if the flesh is native in the place of the adhesion that is behind, then you should incise all that is there, and extract it as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with a piece of wool soaked in warm oil and vinegar; and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the treatment of hernia that is in the groin.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The groin is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a bursa due to the softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement exercise and walking on the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear for that which precedes it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, they say that operation in that second one which does the first ones.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it is said that one should place the patient on a raised bed; and then remove the suspensory ligaments of the testicles to their parts behind; and then take the cord of the genitals and pull it towards the thighs which are exposed to the view; and have another minister beside you, and extend them with great force.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert the narrow blade across the section on the right side of the veins where the veins are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excoriate all parts where we have said in extraction of acorns, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place a needle in which is a sharp double point, and insert that into the first of the places where we have inserted the vit, and insert the other one on its end.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert those in the middle place by a straight section according to the length of the wound, and extract that which has been added from the moist and corrupted flesh.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound with the same remedies as those used to treat other wounds in which you wish to generate healing by causing the vessels that do not carry blood from one of the two genitals, which is not harmful for that reason.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	However, if it happens that all the veins are affected, then cover the testicles with a bandage or wrap them in a way that the testicles are crushed by the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the beginning of the veins, and that they are supported, or that they are crushed in a way that is not harmful for that reason.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the treatment of internal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that ends in the abdomen extended over the belly from the sides of the mirac of the belly, so that the intestines of that rupture can come out from any of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the abdomen or of excision of it, and these two species occur due to various causes: impact, or because of a sudden movement, or because of loud noise, or because of the elevation of some heavy cause, or because of similar things.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The symptoms of gout, when caused by the extension of the uric acid, occur infrequently over a long period of time, and do not occur suddenly, and the abscess forms around the joint as the uric acid compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The symptoms of gout when caused by the separation of the uric acid occur suddenly with severe pain; and the abscess appears to be different from the usual appearance, and this is due to the intestine, and the cause of the patient's condition is the parts of the uric acid.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Sometimes the intestine is forced out through the opening in the skin, and this is called an inguinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Sometimes the intestine is forced out due to pressure, and sometimes it enters the intestinal fistula, and this is held, and this is a great danger for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain and more so when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this disease, iron is used with fear, because it should be avoided entering the wound.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation for that is to command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with your hand at the parts of its cavity and follow its return, then place it on his neck between your hands, and lift his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then place the cord that is the cord of the testicles at the parts above, and insert the cord of the testicles entirely through the long; and place two ligatures on the second incision as needed to open the incision with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision is of such quantity that from that one should be able to see through it.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then excoriate that white membrane which is placed under the cord of the testicles, until it is exposed on each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you enter your finger in that place which is the testicle, in that place which is between the white membrane, which is placed under the cord of the wound, and between the second membrane, and separate that adherence which is in the part behind the wound.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then gently pull the testicles out of their sack, and place a white cloth under them on the left side, and raise the hood over them to the right side; and command the assistant to hold it in place while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind it when the solution is completed.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And then carefully examine the testicles to see if there is any cause of the hernia wrapped in the white cloth.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause, then place it on the patient's abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle that is thick and long, about four fingers wide, and insert it at the back of the white cloth, where the sac of the testicles is located; and then push the ends of the needle through the thickness of the skin, and place a pad over them in the shape of a cross.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the needle and tie them very tightly, so that none of the veins that surround them can transmit any cause for infection.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another cloth on the second wound, along the first one, three fingers away; and then leave these two cloths hanging down from the pubic bone, which is where the testicles are located, as much as the size of the wound, and incise all around in a round shape, and remove it from there.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then incise the area behind the pubic bone by section, which runs through healthy and unhealthy tissue as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer a wet cloth soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the cloth that we have recommended (and some white cloths are cauterized, which we have said to place at the beginning of the wound to prevent blood from flowing out, because those cloths sometimes fall off) and leave the cloth hanging until it falls off.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	However, if the wound is delayed in healing, then apply warm water and place it on the wound after we have said to do so.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with the other treatment of wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	On Hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, no one has been found who has been able to cure it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that is visible; which is that you tie the vessels close to the section above that area, and then dry them in the middle location near the abscess, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the dislocation that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some people experience a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and eminate the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not give any cause for the hernias in the groin; and if they do, it is rare; and it returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged, a small incision is made in the abdomen to allow the intestine to exit; and due to the extension of the intestine, which is common in the groin area as we have said, this causes the intestine to be stretched, and it becomes soft and the area becomes inflamed and swollen.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The cure for this is with a pointed cautery as previously described.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Some wounds are cured with iron according to this method: and that the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then the area of the abscess swelling is cut open horizontally according to its size.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then, with strong force, pull out the white intestine that is under the abscess.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the rag and place it over the inflamed area of the abdomen, and press it on the belly button.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then cover both inflamed areas on the end of the intestine with the rag, and sew one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then remove the tip of the finger, and do not insert the needle completely, nor stretch the wound, nor any other cause that you know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that area for the cure of wounds, and when you insert the fields, clean it and restore the wound before it is consolidated; because the needle contracts and does not adjust the height of the rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, because it is more likely to be beneficial.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	The cord of the testicles is softened in some men by the fact that the tissues that are between them are softened, and the arrangement of it is changed.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is entrusted with the cure of this that he makes the patient lie on his side, and inserts the entire cord over the natural cord; and then adjusts two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If you wish, use three or four stitches to mend the excess of the softened tendon and then apply a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then, insert into the stitches; and cure for the healing of the other wounds within which it is healed and remove the fields.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause it seems to me that I should remember of it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember of it except for two reasons, one of which is so that it be known to the doctor when he is questioned about it, who knows the cure of those who have undergone it; and the other reason is that we may sometimes have the necessity of castration of other animals for our benefits, such as with horses, and cows, and pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore it is said that castration is done in two ways: by traction, or by incision to section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In that case where it is done by attrition, the method of the operation is to make an incision in the beast's neck through which the genitals of the patient hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take those parts into your hand inside where they are resolved and do not appear outside the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In castration done by fissure and section, have the beast and take the cord of the testicles from the patient's right hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then tie the suspensory ligaments and make an incision over each testicle where two testicles proceed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then make an incision on those parts that will be removed after the ejaculation.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave any cause on those parts of the circumcision, but make a subtle circumcision over the glans.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This method of castration is better than the one done by attrition, because attrition leaves no cause of the testicles so that the beast desires gout.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then care for the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of gout.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Gout in men can occur in two ways: one is that it appears where the spleen is located, between the two testicles, in a place where there are four small lumps.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes it occurs where the urine is located, between the two testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	And in women, it is a special case: and it is that the lump on the ovary above the uterus is similar to two testicles of a man, a little smaller than half of them, at the part where the penis of a man is located and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: one for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you should insert those fleshy parts adjusted inside until the entrance of that one, and then treat those wounds with the treatment of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second species of men, where urine is located in the coda of the testicles, there is no cure or operation in it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of lentil and meat, which are prominent causes of women's illnesses.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Lentils are often adjusted according to natural causes until it is ready and is cooked properly; some women are magnified in certain women as long as it is spread with them, just like in men, and perceive it during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, you have the excess of lentils in your hand or in an ounce and incised.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And not in incision, especially in the front of the vagina, so that it does not cause bleeding from the wound.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then cure that with the cure of the plagues until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Meat that is not born is meat that was in the horrible of the mother until it fills that, and often it is placed at the parts deformed according to the same way as the first ones (and therefore first called "bad offal"); therefore, you have to incise it like lentils, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arthritis is when the joint of a woman is not perforated, or is slightly narrow.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is caused by an illness that has preceded it, and that is made by flesh not well adjusted or by thin or thick phlegm.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made in the palm of the hand, or in its sides, or in the most prominent part of the hand, or in the lowest part of the hand, and prevents lifting and grasping and bending, and very often prevents menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made by regularly looking at the menstrual blood, if the obstruction is apparent, then you should put it on the thighs called "dice" or on the back.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is by thin phlegm, and it is directed to the two labia, then you should cover and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And place your hand over both of her labia minora, and then place your fingers on the indicated points of the majora to expand them.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her legs extended, and then gently extend both of her labia with force until that delicate cord is broken and the hernia is pushed back in.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and pour oil into it and place that on the location, and stitch the area with a needle to prevent the location from becoming consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	However, if the hernia is large and thick, then you should stitch it with a wide or thick needle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	However, if the hernia is made of flesh, then suspend it with a hook and stitch it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And then apply the medicines that stop bleeding from wounds with bites, such as acacia, and bleeding, and tannin, adjusted with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide-bore canula to prevent the wound from becoming consolidated too soon.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it for several days and administer some of its juice.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it should be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes certain accidents occur in the main nativity of other flesh, and then cover them according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is for abscess in the main part, to the abscess in the main part that is not made with any method.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	About the cure of hemorrhoids and tail and red tapeworm that occurs in the belly of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated by the openings of veins within which blood flows continuously; and since hemorrhoids and their antidotes are made from them.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of those and their symptoms, and to say that those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, say that when the tumors and theirs are in the front of the greater, and do not appear to the touch, then do not make any cure with iron in those.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those that are on the openings of the greater, over which sensation is felt, those that have been cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And cover that you place the woman in moisture and approach the thinnest iron or the sharp cloth, and insert those into the razor blades.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder over those from the flow of one of the insertive powders, with a biting, like acacia and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then soak the feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of the sweat persists, then make that into a decoction of sage and of scraps of mint and of walnuts and of similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of bread and mix that with honey and vinegar, and make an ointment with that on the back of it.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the bone is cut off, it is good; if not, make two incisions and perform an escarification on the mammillae.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and apply it to the wound with honey, vinegar, or garlic water, and heal the area; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May the one who has an especially harsh appearance cover that which you have seen in the second that I said in the same way.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	About the perforation of an accidental wound in the eye.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Special types of accidental abscesses in the eye, such as cranc and lapident abscess, ulcers, adhubelat, erpetromens, fistulas, emorroyas, raguarrias, thyl, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	I have already mentioned these evils and the types of those and their symptoms, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And you should know that in this treatise on abscess, the largest one that is found among the abscesses that are collocated in the breast, and if you want to know how the operation of it is done with a needle.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp and accompanied by swelling and fever, and sometimes it increases and if it is catheterized over that sensation, then do not perform perforation of it, and cure that which helps to mature it within the time that the intensity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then consider whether you make the woman lie on a bed that has two mattresses; and she should lie on her back and adjust her feet to the part of the stomach that is closest to the venture, and her thighs should be expanded, and place your hand on her breasts behind her nipples, and apply what is convenient to that.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should follow the left side and administer the instrument that is inserted into the breast, the shape of which will be found in those causes that will be appropriate.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you want to administer this instrument, hold it with the thumb of your left hand, and ensure that nothing from the instrument enters the main part of the woman, as this could harm the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	However, if the instrument is larger than the thumb of your left hand, then place powder on the surface of your thumb to prevent the instrument from entering the main part of the woman.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And ensure that the thread that is on top of the instrument of the left hand is held by the assistant and rotated inside until it is inserted into the main part of the woman.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the exciter appears, touch it with your hand and clean it with salt and water, then wipe it with a cloth on the left side of the patient.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, place a cloth soaked in warm or cold oil in which there is some sterility; and place the bandage in the section of the main part of the woman.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place your hand on the greater trochanter and above the femur, which was submerged in water in which malvas were built.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it should be cured within two days after finding the one that is suitable for that entrance to be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Some bandages are washed the greater and the wound in such a way that they are immersed in water and honey, and then in the water in which razor or longue of liri or aristologia is boiled, and then return to the wound.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deeply into the greater bandage, then it is prohibited to heal it with iron, having cure that one with that which we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner the embryos are best treated when they are not in a natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning of the figure of the fetus by smelling it, and when you see the woman expelling parts before and desiring to smell the air, and over it is removed by what is on her, and quickly the issue of the embryo, then know that this part is the second natural figure, and its issue over its own head, and the second is hanging or suspended from the belly.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, it is recommended that the patient's belly be gently compressed so that the embryo does not come out too much, and when it moves slightly over its head, it is called the second sign, and it is said of those superfluities as a good manifestation.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Since that is another part of this, which is not natural and not usable, because when the embryo is outside its feet and the body of the patient is in front of its head and its legs are stretched out, or it is outside its head and its hand, or its foot, or its belly, and it is strongly converted on its neck, and similar to the unusable figures of the patient.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you should show all the figures of those, and what meaning is in those so that it is significant for that and stands on that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When it is done, it is outside its head because of natural thirst, and that is very strong on the woman and is made at that difficult part, and then the power of the patient is already weakened, then do that sign, or what the women had of it, and evaporate the pain of the patient with fenugreek and mild olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the sponge between her legs and tear that second one, or cut it with your finger until you reach that which is wet inside.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Press the belly of the woman until she gives birth to the child.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if she does not give birth, then cover the woman with a mixture of mustard seed and fenugreek powder.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, approach the cradle, that she be calm and do that which is necessary; and give her a mouthful of water and a noseful of water for an hour, until the child is born quickly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two arms of the child are born at the beginning, then cover them with a small cloth bit by bit.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then lower the chair to the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the shaking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the hands are not intact and the fetus is dead, then incise those and extract the remaining fetus or tie the umbilical cord to the patient's hand with a cloth and extract that as well, because that soul has been lost.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The eyes of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the embryo has eyes on its feet, then cover those with something, and then turn the fetus small, and then make it equal to that, and then take one of its legs and extend those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When the eyes are inside the thighs, then command that one to speak, and make that one express itself in a condition, because that soul has been lost if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if that one is not lost, then return the small fetus little by little until you reach that second natural figure, because that soul has been lost in the other eye.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited to do all that we have recommended, then take some mucilage of althea and dissolved gum, and grind everything in the mortar for good mixing, and then apply that to the wound of the woman, the lowest part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that cushion in hot water, until you achieve the hypochondriac points.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when those parts behind are softened, then do to him the subfumigation of mint and pause that to him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the subfumigation lasts for an hour, then you make that steam over a hot stone, and after that, you do that steaming and remove the mouth of him, and lift from that, and press the lowest part of his belly with a firm compression, which makes him immediately sweat.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	And observe the effect on his body and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	And when he has observed the effect of this form, then you gradually engage his smallest fingers; and the woman stays covered on his neck, and his feet are down, and those are on the side, and complete his hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on his belly gradually, and after that, you remove that which is behind his feet from the crown until it is prepared in the lowest part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the fetus is not forgotten, then take the feet of the patient and move them with great force, and gradually press that which is over the small intestines into the parts above until the fetus can be pushed out.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then insert your hands and gradually equalize the fetus, and command the woman to express herself until the fetus is pushed out.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The entire length of the fetus hangs from one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It should be engineered in the reduction of the patient's abdomen, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make that happen.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it cannot be pushed out, then perform the jazzier on the light, and shake the cushions of the patient with great force, and gradually administer liniments that you have and recommend for muds.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the child has come out, then perform that serer on the china, and gradually study the reduction of the abdomen, and equalize the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command her to understand when it is pushed out.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	When the child's head is expanded, its hands and the surface of its foot are at the two sides of its mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	That the midwife holds the child's hand and gradually turns it, and that it be gently.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And as it is and how much it is equal, then pause over the chest of the child with that which we have recommended of oil and ointments.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command the child to gradually open its mouth, and when you have done that, place a spoon on a plate and command it to be inclined over the left side, and then command the child to be comfortable; and do that soothing condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The outcome of the prepared fetus is on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the second finger of the mother is inserted into her vagina in this way, consider, and then you insert the second finger into the child's anus until it is emptied of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the child is suspended by its face and neck, then you insert your finger into the navel, so that it is not held and rots.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then apply pressure to the parts that are most affected until the second that covers it, and send the woman to bring some bandages, and the servant who is outside should wait patiently until God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of many twins or many offspring.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that the bandages of twins or many offspring should not be too tight, and some are three or four, but that is strange and causes suffering; but it is a natural cause, and not a living one.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, whether they are multiplied, one by one, and they are separated by the umbilical cord of each of those and some bandages are loosened as if it is a fetus that is naturally patient, and its position is supported by some bandages that are not unnatural.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to remove from their position and reach that which we have said about unnatural figures, then cure those as we have recommended.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the wise woman makes something that causes ease and subtlety, and delay, and is engineered according to all figures according to what is prepared by the engineer for her benefit, leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women give birth to one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten, and it is already necessary for me to verify that a woman who has aborted six times, and another who has given birth to all of them, the cause of which is made by the glorious saints.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all such knowledge that is in the science of the wise woman, which is very useful for that which resembles it, and therefore she applies herself to that which is useful.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus, use what we have said in the division of medicine and do not defile it, and you may safely use operation to remove it from her, then consider whether the woman is of sound health and not subject to any of the accidents by which she is feared for loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is lying on her back, her head should be slightly raised, and her arms and legs should be elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The nurse should hold the patient's arms or place them flat on the bed to prevent the patient from moving during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then, you should moisten the mouth of the woman with oil and a mixture of mint, fennel, and sesame seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then, the midwife should place her hand on those oils and mixtures, and she should insert her hand into the vagina, and she should feel for the umbilical cord in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	In such cases: then you consider whether the fetus is ready to breathe on its own, and if so, you should find the umbilical cord in the neck, chest, mouth, palate, under the chin, beard, breastbone, or other appropriate locations.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the inflammation is on his feet, then in the plantar fascia, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And have him hold his hand on the bent part of his arm, place your hand on the curvature of his arm in that place between the elbow and shoulder, and insert your hand with ease and feel the pain in any of those places we have mentioned until you reach the cause of the pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and hold another hand in the position of his arm, or third if necessary, so that it is attached equally, and not extended according to its straightness only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let your hand be at all parts, so that the pressure of his arm is relieved as it is done in teeth to remove it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And let the extension be softened in that place between them; and if any part of it is held, then cover those mentioned hands with oil and insert those experiments and rotate those that are held.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the foot is forgotten, then the joints are moved into a place that is more suitable; and make an incision so that the entire foot is exposed.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is twisted to the other side, and it is not possible to reduce it by its ligaments, then cover that area with a cloth; and remove it so that the entire area is exposed, and incise it or at the joint of the hand or in the cavity.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And make sure to do the same in the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the foot is large, or the ligaments are damaged in the ankle, or it is in the joint of the foot, and water is collected there, then insert spatulas between the said parts and cut the head and remove the water, or use an instrument called “alundat”, the shape of which will be found among the other instruments in the capital that is appropriate for this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Similarly, if the foot is naturally large: and then make an incision at that part, or use an instrument called “alunda” as we have said; and remove the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is dislocated and pressed against the furcula, then it should be cut open to release the moisture that has accumulated in the chest.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated and the patient is not overweight, then you should insert the head as soon as possible according to your ability.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the left side of the abdomen is swollen or in hydrocysts, then pierce that which runs the moisture that is in it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the foot is above the feet, then the direction of the vein should be towards the mouth of the main vein.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the abdomen and chest are pressed together, then remove that which has covered your hand with a cloth, and pierce the abdomen and chest to release that which is in those.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are still and the head returns, then insert your right hand; but if the mouth of the main vein is blocked, then insert your hand into the larynx, and surround that which is on the head, and pull that which is towards the mouth of the main vein, and after inserting one or two inches, pull it out.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mouth of the mother is closed by an abscess that affects the child, do not force it over him; before that, apply a moist, heavy fumigation.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply ointments; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the fetus is on its side, try to turn it over if possible; and apply what we have said about the live fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If that is not possible, then cut it off with scissors and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And make sure not to leave any remains of the second trimester.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your work, apply what we have said about the treatment of abscesses that affected the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if blood flow occurs, apply cold compresses and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in the belly of whom was a dead fetus, and another pregnancy started, and another dead fetus was found.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to the man for a long time that an abscess formed in his abdomen; and when fire was brought over it, he began to groan loudly.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to his care, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied some strong-adhesive plasters to him, and after several days, I removed one bone, and after a few more days, I removed another bone; and he was very surprised, as there were no bones in his abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then he thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So he continued to suffer from the wound, and he extracted more bones from him, which were already in existence in his abdomen, and had been there for a long time, causing him a small amount of pain.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And he did not deny that it was strange, but rather that in that place there was knowledge and help for that which the skilled physician uses to treat him.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of instruments needed to extract the tooth.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of a lever is used to open the mouth:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a pliers in which the jaws are clamped together, to which clasp there are two levers at both ends of two handles:
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this lever should be more subtle than the clamp, and it should be made of wood or of bone:
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each handle should be two fingers wide, and the thickness of each end should be one finger thick; and the length of each is a palm and more; and in the middle of the two handles there are two adjustments of that measuring rod, which are already fixed, whose length is the greatest of one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments should be inserted in the mouth of the jaw so that they can be opened when you turn the two mentioned levers:
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form of that very subtle and deceitful disease:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Should be made from a piece of wood or bone according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the end of that two additions have, like sometimes, and the length of those additions is one span, and the width of each is two digits.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the largest, then you place your hand on the left side of the foot while the feet hang down, and insert that which is between the patient's thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then raise your hand with the instrument like forceps equally according to the amount that you want of the approximation of the mouth of the largest until the midwife makes what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of the chisel which the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of the instrument with which is pushed the fetus:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of the forceps with which is held the large head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps at the end, like sometimes, and some of them are made long like this, like sometimes, to which is attached at the end, like the scissors of a seamstress, which is cut and held.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of administration for small doses:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a single drop:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a double drop:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps with which the teeth can be closed and held firmly on the child's head:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a saw with two ends, by which the head is amputated:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two long saws:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercised, and as more species of them are multiplied and prepared by the craftsmen, it becomes easier for them to perform their work and less necessary for men due to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should not neglect the work of these instruments, whether it is inside or outside, as the need for them is not excuseable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction of the second tooth:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second tooth is held, command the patient to hold their breath, then make a strong pressure on the condition, and place your hand over the mouth and nose of the patient, and if by force it does not come out, it is well.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take an egg and pierce it on the cover, and place it in the herbs burning at the mouth of the pot, with salt and rough pepper and anet and camomile and Arabic and cassia lignea and sainturea.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the pot, and place it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a cannula of siphon in the mouth of the pot, and hold it inside until the vapor comes to the bottom of the pot.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then do the stirring as we have said, and the second time it is quickly removed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this cure is not effective, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of althea, and then enter it into the womb and rub it with the second time, and when it has found, then take it and extend it little by little if it is attached to the neck of the pot, then enter it the second time as we have recommended, and when it has found the second time, extract it little by little according to how the pot does not catch the attraction vehemently.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before performing the operation, make sure that the patient's arms are extended to the right and left for ease of movement.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of attraction so that it obeys and avoids adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the cure of sucking and medication with herbs from the oil.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if all the causes we have recommended are not followed, then remember that whatever is essential to the patient from the body to the mouth of the mother should be placed on the cushion of the woman, and then christen it with a solution of honey and tetrafarmacon; because that will cause it to dissolve and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it dissolves, lift the bad odor to the head, and to the stomach, and that causes the patient to vomit; and then remember that sub-fumigations and appropriate measures should be given to it.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May ancient authors also spoke of sublimation of nitre and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument by which the woman is sublimated must be for the retention of menstruation and the second.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of iron or copper.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the narrow end should be placed in the container and the wide end over the fire, and the sublimation should be placed over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that in which that sublimation is consumed and repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the cure of the child's unperforated anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When newborn children and their anuses are not perforated, which are already narrow and tightly closed.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then ask the midwife to pierce that narrow part; and if not, pierce that space sharply, and be careful not to touch the sphincter.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place your hand over that wool soaked in vinegar and oil; and cure that opening where it is not open.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that he may be choking, then place a tube in his throat to help him breathe, and remove it when he wants to cough.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if you have experienced choking of the anus due to the consolidation of a plague or abscess; then make sure that this consolidation is not cut, and then cure it with the remedy we have mentioned for the cure and the poultice.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the cure of fistulas that occur afterward.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the abdomen, which are often large and occur near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	And if it is a fistula or pustule.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And if that swelling is ancient and comes from the moisture, a white or thin pus, and some of these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are recognized by the presence of worms, for their exit and for their windiness; and some patients use the patient's excrement, and it is often found in these worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas are sometimes visible in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the meat of the penis; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the navel of the buttocks.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in that which is known as a fistula penetrating into the anus and not penetrating, you insert your finger into the anus, and then gently probe the fistula with a soft or iron tool when it is not turgidity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is turgidity in that place, then gently probe with a soft or horsehair tool until you feel the tool or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all or do not proceed due to some cause of diarrhea, vomiting, or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then treat it accordingly.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the penis, then the meaning of that is necessarily urine from that place and prohibition of that so that that place may be consolidated by medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If the pain penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes severe pain in the circumference, it is then called a boil if there is no turgescence inside the bone, and severe pain in the circumference of the limb; and that from there it often spreads quickly; and that it does not work in that medication, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no cure for all, and the cure of those is difficult and depends on the skill of the surgeons upon which it is based.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	If in that which is not penetrating and ancient, the cure is done by iron and is spread according to what I have advised you and what has been done before.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And if the patient grips your hands between his own and raises his legs into them, the cushions should be inclined towards the belly of the patient, and then insert a probe of lead, or of iron if there is turgescence in the fistula, until you know the location where the probe enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient has pain in their abdomen, then you should insert your finger into the belly.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the same pain in your finger as when it enters deeply into the flesh, then you know for certain that this is penetrating; and then do not treat in that area, because it is not healing, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, they say that this is healing in some people who are sick with the dart.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine that is hoped to be very effective in this is that you ignite a thin cauterizer according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert that fire into the fistula until it reaches around the abdomen; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the flesh-like tissues that resemble a quill of a goose have been cauterized.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure those wounds that are wrapped in a bandage until all the flesh-like tissues that have been cauterized have healed, and then cure those wounds with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, then it will not be healed at any time by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the probe enters, and does not penetrate into the abdomen, which is in the buttocks, and between the probe and the abdomen is a velament, of flesh or of skin, and if the fistula is in that place, then dry the flesh from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if the probe dries inside the fistula, and if the drying reaches the location where the end of the probe is, and through the probe it is released and cautery.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulas that are assembled like a pen quill and do not have any cause of those.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if pus flows between you and your operation when you have those flesh, then milk that is and from the pus a more appropriate instrument to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, because the cauterizer with fire adjusts good doses: it adheres to those flesh adjusted, and abscission of the pus from the exsecacio of the humidities.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then carefully remove the calves that are wrapped in bandages or caused by three twists in that place where the leg begins, and then carefully remove the wound that generates and solidifies hard meat.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And in these remedies, which have astringency and drainage; when it is restored, it is healed and there is no fear of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is extended from there to the surface of the rectum, then introduce the finger into the anus and examine that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if the tent is placed and enters between you and it is covered with skin or meat, and is directed towards penetration, then it is not an operation in that place but a second way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause of this is to administer it in that place in one of three ways: either to cauterize that as we have said; or to dry out that so that you can possibly enter those and the cure provided, and do not process any for the reason that you do not incise the skin containing the bowel, and that an accident occurs on the patient's will and the evidence; and then cure that which we have said is very strong to heal; or lengthen that covering and cleanse that which dries out that into the anus, as we have said, or with the tent or another instrument of sharp extremity, and cleanse those fistulated flesh which are in the section inside where you can perform the crustation; and then force yourself to restore the whole wound section, and if the outlet below is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the anus, and is more painful for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some ways, the fistula is finished according to this method: when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is around the left side of the buttocks on the surface of the skin and on the edge of the buttocks, then take a perforated extremity, which is like an awl for preparing the wound in this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into that layer of fat or around those; and then insert the tent into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates the edge of the buttocks near the anus, then you extract the fat from that area where you insert your finger into the anus; and extract the end of the fat and adjust both ends, and let it rest for a day or two, and when more of the fat is inserted into the flesh, then cut those parts of the flesh which are between the two ends of the fat and which can be removed.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then care for the wound until it is healed and cured.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifices of the fistula are not penetrated, then make them so in some way that is prepared by you, but not too deeply so as not to injure the ligament; and then insert something into that which is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spindle that is used to pierce the fistula: its curvature is sharp on one side and flat on the other, so as not to injure what is not necessary, sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Stitching of edematous parts where there is inflammation at the beginning of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Edematous parts are of two kinds, either between the buttocks like charcoal, or those which are like grease.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those, there are small and large ones, which cause inflammation from those immediately and are one, and their matters, and their back, and at the buttocks of those.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those which have inflammation at the back of the buttocks are according to the amount of moisture, from which there is a yellowish discharge or a small amount of pus, and its color is according to the matter.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is dipped in the intestine is that you command the patient to lie down and that they expire into the intestine while the bowels appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you sit and support the patient's arms or whatever you have to hold them with, and then incise their ribs.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the arms are not held with those because of their moisture and softness, then take those with a rough cloth or a cotton cloth or a woolen blanket, and extract those with the scissors, and then incise those and powder some caustics on the incision, so that they are in place as a cauterizer; or cauterize them according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the wound does not obey the exit, then crucify the patient with a cross in which there is a small mordicacy, and bathe them with that water which is in the belly and which obeys the exit more when the patient expires.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the swollen parts deform the buttocks, the cause of this is usually fleas, and you should remove them with your nail, or with a pin, and scrape them off, and then cure them with the remedy we mentioned earlier when they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And the one who comes before should administer a second suture according to this method: take a thread wrapped around an awl and insert it into the swelling at the top parts, and make the awl penetrate the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread on the part behind the awl, and longitudinally; and strongly tie the swelling to the structure, and remove the thread and the awl.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and leave one undone so that the excess of the cure comes from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the buttocks; and place that on the wound and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that person inside the box; and when it is closed, care for them with herbs or other remedies until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Fistulas caused by excessive dryness or natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if those remedies do not work in that medicine, then prick those wet areas with a needle or your nail, and place the scab from above on them, which prevents them from consolidating; and then care for those that have consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then apply those wet areas with a stronger plaster than the first one, and care for those that have healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of almsamen.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that almsamen, as it is called, is not red like a claviel, and is found throughout the body and mainly in the parts below the feet and the knees, and causes those painful swellings.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then cut that which is inside the nail circle, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its place; and then care for that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the second as it is preceded in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	The wart is a small elevated, round, fistula on the surface of the skin, and it causes pain in the joints of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And its treatment is that you extend and cut it, or that you remove it with forceps or a needle.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And the instruments that I would say are already removed.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	The ant is a small, feathered or large, fistula on the surface of the skin, and when it bites there, it causes a similar bite as an ant, and it is made around the skin.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And its treatment is that you take a needle of pen or voltor, and it should be strong, and place the ant over the ant within the circle of the needle parts; and then rotate your hand with the needle through which you cut it, and place it in the flesh, and remove the ant from its place.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a needle or iron in this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part above the needle should be thinned out, unbroken (not pierced), wrapped by someone who can remove any impurities and turn it around.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the wound according to what is written in the cautery of athyls in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are used to give cristeri (a type of medicine).
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some veguadas (a type of medicine) are made from silver or lead or melted or hammered; and some veguadas are made from those instruments that are small and large according to those that are administered, because the one that is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and from those of which the bellies are inflamed or painful, the cristeris of those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and few cristeri (medicines):
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the needle above should be wide according to this manner; and at the distance where the bag is attached, it should be as thick as possible.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the patient's bed, which is inserted into the anus, should be soft (not removed) like a lion, to avoid sensitivity; and on one side of the bed, two troughs, and on the other side, one trough, and the widest trough should be according to the size of the rays and slightly larger than a small one.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines of the bladder of an animal or of lamb's wool are placed, and the lid of it is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with a small tube as it is rotated; and if the space between the tubes is the largest of them all.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And insert those tubes firmly with a strong cord of strong silk, or around those; and adjust the bag; and when it is placed in the bag, it should be straight in the head of the crucifix between two distinct strong bands, and crucify each tube: But the quality of crucifying that is to fill the bag with the medicine, which should be scalded according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and be careful not to be too cold or too hot.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be placed on their back, and their thighs raised, with a cushion or pillow under them; and a cloth soaked in olive oil, or album of hen's eggs, or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substance, should be inserted into the rectum to facilitate evacuation. The nurse should hold the basin and express the contents until everything is evacuated from the intestine into the bowl; then remove the bowl and the patient can lower their thighs to the side.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine does not work as expected, hold it in as much as possible; if you fall asleep while taking it for the whole night, it is better to take it in the morning.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	However, if you clean the patient in the solutions of the belly and the evacuation of them, then repeat the cautery until they are healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are pus or abscesses in the rectum, then use a soft and thin bowel, from the bowels that infants are made of.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of plaques
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	It has already been said in the division of the treatment of plaques that this was appropriate for the free man, and thus the treatment of those who are sick and require medicine according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that the plaques are diverse according to what kind of plaque they are and where they occur on the body.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which plaques are formed are similar to those of gout, or incision by a spade or a dagger, or percussion from a lance, a stick, a sword, or similar to those of gout.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the plaques that occur in the parts of the body be similar to those that cat on the head, or neck, or chest, or stomach, or back, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And thus, the treatment of some plaques is recommended because it follows that reason and rule for the other plaques.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple wounds of the head, for the memory of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, it is said that when a simple wound occurs in the head and is not a fracture, if it is from a stone or something similar, and has only been washed with water and is large and you fear for that patient due to the risk of abscess, then you should first apply leeches to the cephalic vein as soon as possible, and do not delay this; and then extract the pus according to the amount of its virtue if no other cause prevents leeching, especially if the wound that exists from the wound is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if the leeching is from the opposite side of the wound, then keep the patient away from repletion and vigorous activity and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is any cause that prohibits the leeching, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or fish.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place upon the wound, if an abscess occurs, apply a poultice made of olive oil mixed with rosemary or vinegar that is styptic.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	However, if it is certain that an abscess has occurred recently and the air has not changed, then apply a powder that I will recommend to you.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed, then apply a poultice made of herbs that are not yet healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	However, if the wound is large or has sharp edges and the lips of it are not adjusted by stitches, then adjust them according to what I will recommend for the stitching of such wounds.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	However, if the wound has already exposed bone and pus, and it is not retained by stitches but only a small suspensory, then scrape away that and apply medicines to the wound and restore flesh in place of the codeina, and command the patient to eat foods in which there is grease: such as caps and similar things, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If the bone in the cavity is rotten and does not stick to the bone, then you scrape off all that and wash it, and then cure it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and is not cut by medicine, then you should look for the artery, and if you find it uncut, then scrape it with a spatula or tie it; and if it is necessary that what we have said does not work, then you cauterize where the pus is removed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is light; however, you should powder them with this powder, which solidifies when it comes into contact with the air, which moves them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is as follows: take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished charcoal; mix all this into a fine powder, and then fill the wound with it, and compress it with good compression until it sticks to the wound, and coagulate it with the pus.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then tightly press that above the powder and leave it there until it is not stuck, because it is not cured of it until the medicine enters and heals.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And some people do that alone with cauterization when you are not present and it is not from a dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical operation is performed in large wounds when it is necessary to be placed on those and be tightened, and their recent wounds are covered with a clean cloth, which has not been altered by air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the summer time, then this powder position is not used, but rather cure those with that which we have said, unless you place it on those wounds with a dressing of diastious or place it on those wounds with a paste of flour and water until they are completely healed; and then cure them with the other cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if an accident occurs to the wound fracture in bone, and it is small, then you remove that with that which we have said.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will say the cure for the fractures of the head in this case is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the plagues of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the plague occurs in the neck, it is not different in medicine, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves of the neck are cut or the artery, then if it is nerves, not in the engine but rather to avoid cure of which causes strong stanching, as well as ziniar and zegi that is verdigris and similar to their four nozo to the nerves and contrazo aquel.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place anything over the plague of any cause of all flesh, because the substance of the nerves is flesh and the continuation of which is to the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that which is cured of false medicines, as it is caused by washing with warm water, some vapor infused in olive oil or not-olive oil, and thucia when washed with warm water and the others peyras minarantz according to this manner, and found humitz.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, then administer stitches or tie the lips of it, and then care for that area with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the wound has depth or accidents in the lowest part, then puncture it in the most suitable place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If the wound has an incised artery and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent that from happening.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the ribs of the chest have been incised and the veins of the collarbone are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound with stitches over the edge of the chest and do not touch that; equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and apply a structure that is decent, and care for that area with ointments in which there is stiptic effect and excitation until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has penetrated into the bone, then perforate it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all of them that you can; and what is not visible to you, leave it alone until the wound heals, and it will be separated and the edges of it will be united.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle powder over it that was recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the wound has become a fistula, then cure it with the same thing that the memory of which will soon come to its own capital.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the neck or similar ones that are made between the ribs and are made with a space or a knife or a lance or a similar thing.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of a lance or a knife, and sometimes you see the depth of it, then consider more if the wound has bleeding when the patient inhales; then you will know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth in it and the wound is recent at its own place, then you should place powder on it during the first hour, and not strengthen that so that the wound does not remain in the depth of it and that it returns to the heart and that no one hurts the patient, but rather pause in that attractive place, and delay those days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the mouth is not present, then place your hand on the orifice of the wound, so that the liquid from the humors can drain; and make the patient lie on their side so that the liquid in them can flow out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the wound has passed three days or more without causing spasms, trembling of the heart, or stricture of the abdomen, and other signs are good for the wound, then know that the wound is healing; and then apply ointment to one side and another treatment until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the wound is delayed, and it has been opened for a long time, then know that it has become a fistula; treat it therefore by its own method.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by a cut or a thrust, and it is simple on the surface of the thigh or back, then treat it with water that is used before stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If there has already been an incision in the bone, and it is already cut through, then twist the plate and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then insert the instruments that can reshape the plate, to facilitate their extraction.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And from the other plates in other members, the treatment in cure is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plates of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition that occurs in the belly is either large, or small, or mixed.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Some veins and nerves of the belly, because they are inserted deeply and sutured deeply and subtly.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And disruption of small veins is difficult to treat by another method, and it is known that the reduction of them is more difficult, so you should not wait to insert them at their proper place as soon as possible, because they are open and swell, making it difficult to treat.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is that in which it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is difficult in the two species called hernias.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You should know that the abdominal suture is performed in four ways, but two common methods are sufficient for sutures of other parts of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other proper sutures connect to other parts of the body, but they are more proper for the abdominal suture.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I advise you to have each exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, say that when the part is small and there is no cause of the intestine for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of the two methods: either by paravent of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine becomes inflamed due to cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when that is so, cover the wound with a cloth soaked in warm water alone, or with a poultice made of boiled barley, cumin, and spices, and apply it to the intestine before the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some people do this in which there is astringency, and it is better than water alone in resolving inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which salt and vinegar are mixed, because for this the instrument of the patient is relieved from much pain.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument of the patient is not removed from this cure, then divide the disruption with a small sharp instrument that is not blunted by rust.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first cure is best when it is proper that it not be dry, and not occupied by the need to dry and defecate.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, if its shape is like this:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is sharp and pointed, and the other part is not sharp, and its tip is thin, but not as thin as a needle, with a slightly blunt edge in front.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the plague has increased and the intestine is pushed out, then return it to its original shape, in its proper place, if possible above water, because that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is widespread, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then make the patient lie on their stomach, and place your hand on their back as high as possible; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place your hand on their head and the other on their chest as high as possible.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the belly, then place your hand and your attention quickly on the side where the pain is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus, administer this in the severe and mild cases.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the minor cases, place what is prepared on your hand, and make sure that the minister holds the disruption completely with their hand and adjusts the lips of it, and remove one stitch at a time until you find another cause.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: you take a needle, or count the number of needles according to the size of the wound; and lay it at the end of the disruption of the said ring, and strengthen the needle one, or do not put it in the two ends of the thread that is below the skin of the parts that are inside, until you make it penetrate that part; and you have already added two ends of the thread and two ends of the silk, and make four knots.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Approach the double needle in the circle of the needle, and some stitches of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by aggregation, and then leave the largest one and put another needle in that, and then tie that with the same thread as the first needle; and do not stop doing this until the wound is completely closed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of medium thickness between coarse and fine, because fine needles penetrate the flesh more easily; and large needles are difficult to insert into the tissue, therefore it is better that they be of medium thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And do not let the needle be stuck in two ends of the wound intended for, because the flesh should not be penetrated too easily and the wound should heal before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they should not be prolonged for stitching so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then carefully insert the tips of the needles so that they do not pierce the patient's skin; and place cotton pads over the sutured parts, which hold the tips of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound is healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of stitches with needles are most suitable for small wounds, since in their suture there is usually one or two or several needles.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second type of stitch is similar: and you administer the four ends, two from the catgut and two from the silk, in a row, with a needle that is thin and thick enough.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle to the same part of the thread from which it started, so that the false knot on the wound does not rise again, so that the suture is the second type of stitch with a strong thread.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Pause between each suture the amount of the thick of the said injury.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch is for women.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And this stitch was used to sew the wound that occurred in a man's abdomen, which was pierced by a knife, and was a rupture of the main vein of a palm, and was located around two palms from the intestine in the middle of the member; and then he reduced it so that the intestine had been pierced for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and he treated it and it was cured; and then he applied this ointment for a while, and he continued in his positions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had thought that it would not be healed; and because of a miracle, fire, which was in a place where the wound was not treated with any medicine, but only covered over the wound for two days and frequent bathing with honey water until the fire healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two specific types of sutures according to the narrative of Paracelsus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And if you begin with the suture of the neck, and insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And as the needle penetrates into the neck and the other hand moves correctly and for the length of the entire body, and leave the end of the cord in which you inserted the needle; and make the other end of the needle penetrate from the front part to the back part on the other side of the body.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And as you have made that penetration, then make the other end of the needle penetrate in another direction in the same side of the body from the front part to the back part; and leave the end of the cord that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the partida dedintz to the partida deforo.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the needle penetrate in the other end of the cord at the point that makes that penetration in the cord at the end of the mirror which is in the part of the body where all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then, from this position, lean towards the other side and place your hand at the end that is on the other side of the spine, and extract the needle from the codex, and return it to the codex and cover the end of the spine that is on the other side with a cloth; and extract the needle from the codex that is on the other side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Do this several times, and do this several times, approaching another time before you cover all of what is deformed according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The advantage of this method of suturing is that you cover the wound with a piece of cloth that covers the skin, in order to keep the spine away from it for a while, and then cover it again after you have completed the other side.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second special method of suturing, which is called Guillotine, and this is the same for both sides, and it should be recommended to you, is that you cover that second semilunar piece that doctors usually cover with another, in order to add all the parts together at the corresponding part of it, and apply the end of the other side to the end of the mirror on the other side, and this is done according to your recommendation.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you place the needle at the end of the mirror, near your own part, and make it penetrate into that spot, and lay two ends of the thread; then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from your part to the other end of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then rotate those threads, and make each one penetrate from the other end of the thread into your part in two other ends of the mirror that are on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suture is better than the common one, and it is the suture of which previous remembrance was mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Guillia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And moreover, it is said that the suture of the belly is corrected with two needles, so you should insert each one in these according to your own, and begin with the insertion of the needle that you are supposed to use, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the sutures of those that cover the hearts equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When the disruption occurs in the middle part of the abdomen, the suture of that area is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of medicine for plague is different from that of other diseases.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Because the cause is that when you obtain the plague recently, it is the same saint denying that the air alters it, and reduces the intestine and its contents, and does not treat it properly, then place something on that fleshy powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then place something on that alcohol-soaked cloths which are with you until they become hard and stiff, and are consolidated and dry; and then cure that as is the cure of other diseases until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the medicines with you, then place something on that garlic, vinegar, and honey, and change it twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in cases of simple diseases when the plague is present.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you are afraid that the plague might spread to the main members, then cover yourself with lion's wool dipped in oil of good quality, or with rose oil, and place it around the areas where the fleas live and leave them there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, which is caused by this, then apply a black stiptic wound sealant, and more so if the perforation reaches the intestine and is made penetrating into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you should know that the pus from a large intestine is less dangerous for healing than the pus from small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to heal the intestine called "gugu" because it does not receive healing from any plague that may be in it; and this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, and its size, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if the thing that comes from the plague is the thread, and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your rightfulness, which reduces the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If the space has already been cleaned and it is now black or white, then place your finger on the spot where it becomes dark from the blood, so that the blood flows out through the veins and arteries in the cloth.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert the other thread through that opening, and place two ends of the finger hanging from the part where it is separated from the cloth over the wound, so that the attraction of the wound is from the cavity of the cloth and the emission of the blood from the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of wounds that occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because they have seen that one who was wounded in their belly by percussion of an arrow and the wound was the part of the middle of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, and they were able to manage and vent the intestine.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then they continued the treatment of that wound which was not confirmed in its healing, but they stopped subtly after it became healthy and the location was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And if you have not yet seen the location that has already solidified, then apply pressure over the patient's abdomen to prevent further damage; and do not attempt any treatment for this injury, but rather let them rest in their bed, eating and drinking as usual, and then proceed with the necessary treatment.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced physicians have said that when a hernia occurs in the intestine, and it is small, then you should follow this method: first, take large needles; then adjust the two lips of the hernia and place one of those needles with the open mouth over the two lips of the hernia; when you put it on them and strengthen your mouth, cut off the cap of the needle, which adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another needle next to the first one, and do not stop making these stitches until you have made one after another according to the size of the entire hernia.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then return that and the hernia to its place; and leave those needles in the intestine until the intestine is healed, and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the hernia is tied with a thin, sharp thread, which is made from animal intestine; and you should take hold of the end of this thread, which should be unsheathed, and tie the end of the hernia to the other end of the thread, wrapped around it, and then insert that thread into the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This method of suturing is not other than the second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then it cannot be sewn up, but only drained, and not healed from all sides.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	For the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You should know that every wound and abscess that becomes hidden and ancient, and is made into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and does not heal all the time and is not excised, in any member, generally it is called a fistula, and we call it an ancestral wound.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And secondly, a fistula is indeed a narrow, white, painless channel that has the same cavity as a painful ulcer; and to avoid naming it an abscess, it is called a fistula.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in moist men, the one that causes pain; and if the humidity is not removed within a few hours, it will cause damage.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this humidity is moved, and it is thin, thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned this in the division, as I said about wounds, that any ulcer that is not healed or is not in its raw flesh is not of that kind but due to one of these causes: one of which is because of pus under the skin; or maliciousness of the ulcer; or because between the ulcer and the lips there is hard flesh that prevents new flesh from growing; or because the ulcer moves, and the matter that is in it is of bad quality; or because the medicine used for its treatment is unsuitable; or when corruption catches in the region, and it becomes pestilence; or due to the nature of the region, as in Saragossa, where digestion of evils is difficult, and healing from apostema takes longer by nature; or because there are one or more abscesses.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Here are all those causes, their symptoms, and the treatment with various medicines in this division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And now I will tell you how to treat fistulas, which are made by surgical means.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; among those that come to great veins, arteries, nerves, or the spleen, intestine, bladder, or some costal bone, or some of the spinal bones of the back, or some joint composed by the union of flesh and skin; and these are those that are closest to the principal member and similar to it.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And among those fistulas that follow this pattern are difficult-to-heal wounds, do not receive treatment, and require hard work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if the depth of some fistulas does not reach those places that have been mentioned, and you expect and believe in their treatment, and you want to reach knowledge of them, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula follows correctly, and you can reach it with this.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin probe, as the weight of the body can alleviate and straighten the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has very horrible symptoms, it is not possible to use the probe on it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then clean the orifices with their own humidity, as the moisture you use to clean one spreads to the others and causes them to decay.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then carefully inquire, according to the method that is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the long or short cavity of the fistula is filled with pus, or whether it is a fistula with many openings that is spread over all of your strength, your investigation, your examination of the patient, and the invention of the cause of the pain due to your compression of the hand on the affected area, and similar meanings and causes of accidents in the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have established all these causes with certainty, then proceed to the cure: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near the joint, or far from it, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places that I have already mentioned.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry the fistula after it has been opened, and remove whatever is in that filter and rotten flesh, and what is born in the orifices of the flesh, or of the skin and similar, and cure that within which it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of long depth and is straight, then cut it as much as possible from the front, and remove all the rotten flesh; and apply moistened bandages in acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with a knife.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that to it several times until the acute medicine corrodes all that is in the cavity of the fistula of the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it does not heal by that, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be confirmed by you, then inquire about that and seal it after the second one that we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member present as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and is in any corruption or blackness, then remove that within which the corruption is contained entirely; and cure that with what heals that flesh within which it is not healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and there is no bandage present as it was before, then know that you have not reached the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you must expose it again and carefully make the reason of it and the cleaning of it with the strongest fortification tied, and then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, well; and if not, then know that that corruption is in the depths far within the body, which has not been reached, and therefore you cannot enter into that except by laying open that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the broken bone is small, or it is possible to pull it out, then use delicate forceps that are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if you have the strength to extract all of them, do so carefully without any cause that would harm your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you encounter any resistance due to the presence of moisture, and there is no fear or mistake at the beginning, then carefully cut through those tissues or flesh that are present, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you do not have the preparation of bones from the hour, then place a poultice on that area that will help to soften the wound around those bones of flesh and tissues, and keep the poultice from being consolidated, and strengthen the section that you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having said that, if you fear, place the wound under a bandage soaked in olive oil, or under a bandage soaked in Egyptian wine, or in any of the oils, because when those tissues are healed, and the bones are separated from their position, and the attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If there is a large bone like the bones of the couch or cushion or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the face of it, then rub that resin only behind where that blackness and corruption is, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the area where the corruption reaches, and then cure it before it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend that you have someone who has experienced this in their thighs to assist you in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around the age of thirty, who experienced pain in his groin, and from the parts that were swollen was due to the matter within the body where the matter reaches the groin, and it is a large abscess, and not an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the fire was extended to the thigh amidst the error of doctors until the abscess was healed, and afterwards from that matter, and the cure of the fire was paused until the bed was fistulated, and in the mottled places were made points which all got pus and the humidity of the wound.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then all the care of doctors for about two years, and not in that savage place but in the art, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the bed of that and the matter that was running from it those points into great wounds; and already the condition of that man was all stable and the color of it was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the tent into one of those points and reached the tent to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined quickly those points and found that they reached all parts of the bed.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I showed and incised over one of those points where I described a part of the bone, and at once it was rotten and corrupted and decayed; and already a part of the bed had been corrupted where it had penetrated into the flesh.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then apply that which I had discovered and prepared from the bone that was exposed.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And then apply that which I had discovered and prepared from the corruption that I had removed and applied, which was already dissolved.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then place your hand over the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it does not consolidate.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then apply and discover again on the bone secondarily, above the first discovery, and continue to remove corruption from the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And then apply that which I had discovered from that corruption, and then apply it to cure it and restore it, but it does not restore.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then apply it again and do not stop gradually and specifically, incising the bone little by little, until the restoration is completed around a palm of the bone, and that extracted was from its marrow, and then apply that to the medicine, and it consolidates better and heals.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there is no need for repetition in the operation of that and its sectioning, but rather for the position of the patient's limb and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of death, which occurs in all hours due to excessive evacuation of bad syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so, the cure is for complete healing, and nothing is in place of hard meat; and it is good to position them in their own body and return their strength; and they are positioned in their positions and do not do anything against them in ambulation or harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	And if the bone is in place of the body that has been fractured, then proceed with this method: and it is that you take the bandage and strength at the end of that fractured bone, and command whoever extends it; and place that woolen thread thicker than the first thread; and bring it over the flesh that is left after the bone, and extend the outside of it to draw the flesh to the parts left, and you uncover the flesh over the place that you want to suture so that the stitch does not hurt the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place the table under the bone properly, because when you do that, it is not forbidden to sew without stitching the flesh that has been corrupted.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And if the bone fracture is in the hollow of the bone and does not appear on its surface, then another method should be used to set it.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is not eminent and extends from one continuous part to another, and the fracture is at the middle or in a part of it, then you should remove all the flesh from all parts; place a cushion underneath, and set the first part where the fracture is continuous before setting the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if the setting of the bone is close to the location of the fracture, as we have said before.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the fracture is at a joint, insert a splint at that joint and set the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the fracture is at the connection of two joints, then it should not be set in a straight line but rather bent.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the fracture is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is quite difficult; however, try to find out where the fracture appears to you, and remove that, and moisten it according to each possible position, and when it does not cause you any discomfort or pain, then straighten it as much as possible.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know what are the sawblades that should be used to cut these bones according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and variability of those, and their hardness and rarity; so that you prepare all kinds of tool suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that for that operation you need the specific tool; when you are great in study and long and experienced in the ways of this art, and testimony of the ways of illnesses, then you already have it to measure that which is suitable for each tool for each disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will know the number of tools that you will use at the end of this chapter, the simple ones and those that you will process according to your prohibition, which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Saw shape:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of a ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The second part of this ray should be in the shape of a star-shaped cap, and its points should be in the shape of the stealthy point.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It is not advisable to use it only when the joint caps are corrupted or when the mouth is very wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another well-made saw: make an arch of it with the best iron and the sharpness of the saw, and make the handle of it with good wood.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor with hollowness:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another curved-end razor:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor similar to a needle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incisor that can cut bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this resembles a ray, and the end of it is like a clamp, and it is displayed in various places on the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a ray that suits the ratio of the one that pierces the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular and has a sharp tip.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly coated with all the causes that we have said about razors, incisors, and serrations.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the ends of incisors and the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The ends can be pressed either by intrinsic or extrinsic causes, or if you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the cure does not come, sometimes the corruption can lead to the member that is not affected by any cause, therefore cover that member within that area where the inflammation accompanies the corruption, so that the patient might escape from death or harm due to a greater defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the limb of that person who was affected, is that it becomes black inside before the fire has burned it, or if it becomes poured with the blackness inside before the wound enters that member and takes over the entire body; and thus you must begin to cut it from there.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if it is caused by the corruption of some poisonous causes such as from a scorpion or from viper or from a rattlesnake and the like.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the pressure is at the end of that limb, then you must cut it and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it enters the body, then you must cut that of the root of the elbow, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes over the elbow of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if that happens, then cut the arm through the cavity at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption and the poison pass around the cavity, then that is the death of the patient; and in treatment, the quantity of virtue is limited.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, when decay has caused the foot to rot, then you insert it into one of the nails.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take the sole of the foot, then you insert the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it can enter the knee, then you insert the leg into the joint of the knee.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if decay has already reached the knee, then there is no other option but to let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of inserting or cutting the member is that you strengthen the tendon at the part just before the one you want to insert, and strengthen another tendon over the area; and extend the minister a tendon to the parts behind, and extend the minister another tendon on top; and you separate the flesh that is between two tendons a span wide inside so that all the flesh is discovered; and then insert or cut.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover it with cloth from all parts so that it does not touch the area, and bring the patient's injury and abscess in order.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If the patient has a constant flow of blood while working, then you should cauterize the wound consistently, or place some restricting powders on it; and then return to your medical practice before it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place the injured limb in a suitable bandage, and treat it before it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend that you treat this accident that happened to a man in his foot, which is the same accident that I and you recommended, which occurred due to excessive heat that was similar to a fire burn.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption occurred first in his big toe before it affected the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared for the treatment to arrive at the limb with the intensity of its pain and burning, and the inscription on that foot entered into the joint, and it healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that same corruption occurred in the other foot of the main character.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it reached me, and I was able to reflect on that excess in relation to the main character's medicine, to the healing of the body; and if the excess is not reflected, it begins to go to the other foot before it begins in the main character.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to incise the abdomen of the patient, but I did not want to do so, fearing the repercussions of such an action, and more than that, I feared for the life of the patient, as the patient's virtue was unknown.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he was displeased with me, he returned to his own land and I received word that that man had prepared and incised the entire abdomen of the patient, and was cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not narrated this story except to be helpful in this matter of this illness, and to provide meaning for the reason it was done and how it was done.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the treatment of abdominal pain and quality of clysters with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and it is broken and perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the place remains open as if it were a vessel, and the codex that is above it is covered with fine cloth, and corruption does not reach it, and it is not impressed into bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	If the space is prolonged before corruption occurs in any member, it is called a fistula and not a fistula.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment for it is to insert that whole code into the wound, turning it as it is unwound, and more so when it is thinned and made with cloth, and make sure it does not stick to the wound due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the code adheres and that that corruption has not been achieved due to subsequent consequences, and in the code there is a crack, then you treat it with ointment.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And if you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the breath that comes out of it has a strong odor, then apply that Egyptian ointment which is made of oil and vinegar and equal parts of honey, and adjust them in a vessel, and cover it with a cloth over the fire until the medicament boils and reaches the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take that water which is necessary and dissolve it with that honey; and apply that ointment to the sinus, and strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that blood; and do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the wound remains uninfected.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Some wounds are cleaned with ashes water, when this medicament is not present; and you take the ash of wood, put it on the water; and then apply that to the wound and clean it until you confirm that the sinus has been removed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicament or ash water, then clean that wound with water and honey mixed in equal parts, and clean it with honey, because honey cleanses and washes, and it makes the sinus stick together, and especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wound.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this for some wounds and confirm that the sinus has been cleaned, then clean it with water that makes flesh in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take some yellow myrobalan and dissolve it in the rose-colored oil and vinegar, or you clean that wound with some medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties written about in the treatise of ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the catheter of the injection, then gradually widen it with a small file until it is wide enough to be used.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	Similarly, if the opening is widened, then apply a suture to it and leave enough space for the amount of the injection to enter.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the arm is raised to the parts above is elevated, then dry that part in the lowest place where it is in order for the arm to pass through it. When the arm is pulled out of the sinus, the flesh will be engendered in that place.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the lowest part of the bone as you wish, then prepare the member with the preparation that allows the arm to be pulled out naturally and without any cause of the arm being held back.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative remedies that are placed on the sinus conveniently for that which you want to extend over that drape of lime.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a large quantity that it covers all the sinuses; and then insert the forceps into the correct opening of the sinus, a bit wider than the opening of the sinus; and then extend over another cloth from the side of the tongue according to the amount of the track, and place it over the other one for a long distance from the opening of the sinus in order to lift the secretions of the chest and not to push the cloth too large but rather approach it gently.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	The one that is over the opening of the sinus, which remains in place throughout the entire hour to prevent that which is adjusted on the side of the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so you can know whether what comes from the side of the arm is more or less, or digested, or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And if you have considered the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in this way, and you see that the matter that has been poured over the opening of the sinus has adhered, or has begun to adhere, then you should remove it or tear it away on the third day, and when you remove the plague, then change the cloth and renew the tongue.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	If the sinus approaches the space and adheres to it, do not despair of its attachment, because the healing of it will be appropriated, as in some people where generation of flesh in those places takes a long time, and in others where the opposite is done.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinus approaches for several days and is not ingested, you should know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and is the cause of prolonged suffering, then adjust the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their effect, they are dried as with a diaphragm, when they are adjusted to remove excess addition of spice.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most important thing to cure it is to take a diaphragm and dissolve it in rosy oil, and place it on the wound as if it were its own substance, and comfort that cloth with it, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it is similar in that action, when there is no sinus, diaphragm, when it is thick enough, and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and boil it, and strain it all and powder it over the wound when it is above the fire, and place a cloth on that and strengthen that over the sinus; and place that cloth on the myrrh which you have cooked enough, and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Some witches administer long aristocratic rice (and it is long rice) and lily of the valley, and centaury, and use those simples or adjust them, shred and pound them over the flour that she has recommended; and use that.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this cure, then know that the corruption is in its root, and it has already been investigated in the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you will treat it with fistulotomy, as described above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	For the cure of bent nails and toenails, and the addition of finger cuts and digit sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Bent nails are abscesses that do not come from the nail of the toe or foot, and often they occur in other such cases, and when it is prolonged and its cure is highly valued, it is either a deep abscess or it is corrupted, and often it penetrates into the bone before it rots the root of the nail, and often it corrupts all of it, and often its corruption reaches into the bone before it has a fetid odor, and it is made at the end of the said toe, and its color is made dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	When you have that same tool that we mentioned in the division and do not compare your cure, then make sure to insert the entire excess that remains from the nail and then cauterize the area with that tool, which is helpful in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is healed and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already joined the flesh to the parts of the wound, and the pungent and the lees begin to come out from there, then make sure to place a thin subtle cloth under the angle of the nail that punctures the flesh, and push it towards that, scrape that flesh with facility, and place over it what remains of the flesh of the medicines that were burned corrosively until it is all healed; and then cure that with a salve within which it is sanat.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already spread into the bone, then make sure to insert that bone and the extraneous parts, because there is no time when it can be healed if it is in the corrupted bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you see the corruption and decay in the body, then insert that into one of the empty spaces according to its memory, and cure it before it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the finger is broken or dislocated, and the pain is severe, then begin by applying a splint to the patient, and then dry the finger with a sponge soaked in a sharp solution of transverse incision above it, and be careful that the incision does not penetrate into the flesh that is left behind, as you will cause severe pain to the patient and unnecessary damage to the surrounding flesh; and then cure that location with what causes the least pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, it is not found in the bones of most people, as it is entirely flesh, or it is in the bones, or it is in the fingers.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And most people are not born with it at the tip of the joint, or it is the origin of that in some other bones of the said.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	When one is born in a certain place where nuts of that kind are not bad, and another is born in strong joints, it is considered unfortunate.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are not fleshy, the section is lighter, and you should insert that devil's pitchfork at its width.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	When one is born in the joint's root, the cure is difficult; therefore, be careful of its abscess.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When one is born in the beginning of the nut, you should insert the flesh of that part roundly into the bone, and then use one of those saws that are suitable for that, and cure it within the time it becomes healthy.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	When the consolidation that happens between their jaws or by birth of the man who was born with it, or by consolidation of plague or by burning of fire, or by similar things, then you should cut that consolidation within the time it returns to its natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their clothes an oily rag to prevent them from becoming consolidated lightly, and separate between those, or place between those a thin layer of plaster until it becomes consolidated according to what is suitable.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in the wrist, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	At the beginning of the vice, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varicose, and their veins are thick and full of melancholic superfluities that come from the members of the body, and the most common place for them is in the buttocks, especially in the buttocks of travelers, workers, and porters.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, you should administer a purgative of the body for black cholera some weeks before, and then draw blood from the patient from the great vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure for them is done in two ways: one is that it is cut and thrown away that black bile, and the other way is that the vein is raised and all the blood is extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of the buttocks is done in this way: first, boil the buttock with a hot tail until the black bile is thick and has left the buttock, then strengthen the patient's buttock to the highest possible position on the bed, and then dry the vein in one or two or three wide sections, and then raise the black bile to the middle of the patient's back above the buttock and below the patient's body, and then let it out until the desired amount and frequency is reached, and the patient bears it well.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then approach that one, and command them to avoid foods that generate black bile causing anger.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that is not noticed by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of their legs should be done in this way: you who raise the patient's leg, if it is mottled with spots, and then place it in hot water and massage the leg with a snake-like tail until it becomes red and the veins are opened; or if that cannot be done at present, it should be exercised by strong exercise until the member is scalded.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then remove the cord in the direction of the vein for sectioning at the long or back side of the thigh, or at the bottom of the thigh you should give it a twist, or at the bottom of the thigh you should pull it.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then raise the cord with a pair of forceps and excoriate the vein from all parts until it appears at the sense, and it is to be appreciated that when that one declines to black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so, when you have removed it, take that white thread and tie it again.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place your hand behind that raised and tilted part, and support it with the other hand holding the golden lion.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then remove another section close to that section for three times, and then excoriate the thread from the part above the vein where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then lift that and insert it into the back section of the tail, and then remove it and lift it inside where it is on the second section, and then remove it from the section above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do that inside where it is extracted from the section that is most superior or farthest from all the sections, where everything is hidden; and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to extract and lift, then insert a strong double-edged needle and tie it there and remove it, or insert behind the thread and rotate your hand at every part where it is tilted.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it is difficult to raise that part and it comes over the patient and causes harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the whole area has been scraped out, place your hand over the wound location covered with wool soaked in vinegar and oil, both rosy and not rosy, and cure that part until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is twisted and has a tortuous shape that does not follow the rectitude we have said, then you should cut wherever there is tortuosity of it and in the locations of its envelopment, and suspend those ends within which you raise the whole.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful that you do not incise the vein and do not wound that part, for it is difficult to raise that part; and use your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of incision made to cut the vein:
Forma de unci orp:	The form of a hook:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not to be used where it is sharp-pointed or has a thin tip, because it would wound the vein; and it should have great flexibility like a lion's claw, for if it were too thin, it would incise the vein by its thinness; having both of these qualities as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of vein extraction from the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein originates in the buttocks, in low lands similar to Ategi in Arabic lands and in dry and arid lands of little humidity where there is no herb or greenery.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it often originates in other parts of the body, not just the buttocks.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its condition is putrefaction that comes from the wound, similar to poison that enters the body through snakes, worms, and other creatures generating between the wound and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the susceptibility of its occurrence is due to this vein that happens in the buttock, causing inflammation; and at the location, it is blistered; and then the vein is removed from the location of that blister, which seems reasonable.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then, when it appears at the end, you should wrap around it a piece of lead that is the weight of a drag, between one and two drachms, and tie that and leave the lead hanging from the buttock.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so many times, because of some cause, parts of the body are affected, wrap that in a cloth and apply it to the affected area.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you insert a piece of it and wrap it around; do not insert that of the same kind until it is completely outside, because if you insert that, it will be turned inside out and enter the flesh and cause an abscess and pus to form in the area and ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it can be treated properly and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the back of it and does not leave any cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And this vein is found in some people who are in their length of 20 palms and has reached me that it is 10 palms long.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is inserted at the time of its treatment, then insert the ray into the wound and perforate that with a long needle through the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the area for several days with medicines; and cure that by the cure of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has some wounds that cause pain, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to it with sharp pains, and is issued from which orifice.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Therefore, treat that as we have said in the division and apply that which is above mentioned.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section of worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is not named in any land as the bovine sickness because of the many wounds that are under the skin and it is a small worm that is not between the sinew and the flesh, and it goes through all the body and devalues, and it is shown at the feeling of its own shape of member in member before that disrupts the sinew and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is by putrefaction of some humors that happen with the accident of worms and snakes and earthworms and ascaris in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for the harm of it, because when it goes into the body and is elevated to the head, and reaches the brain, then very badly affects the brain, and that ends with many wounds.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	When you want to heal that and extract it, it is not done without first examining its appearance and position relative to the sensation, and then strengthening what is above it and what is below it with a soft and strong bandage, and then dry it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is found in the flesh and not in the bone, then place a pointed cautery with hot fire over the area where it is located, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see that it has reached the top of the bone, then strengthen the area above it with a strong bandage, and then dry it and extract that; and advise the patient to use medications that evacuate bad humors, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of incision due to pain.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is not named in our land as gout, and it is pain that occurs in various members, and it is transmitted from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And now I will tell you the second thing that I will tell you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	A woman was called to a village, and it was discovered that she had a small inflammation in the vein of her arm, and after being there for an hour, it was seen that this inflammation was moving like worms in this way, more unnaturally than if it were live silver when it moves from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain went to that place and remained in the muscle, and after staying there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it corrected itself in the other arm until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then it corrected itself in me, as if it were moving throughout its entire body after I saw it; and it was too marvelous about the change of it and the speed of member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen that thing in the muscles after that manner, but I had never seen anything that could cause pain to be mutated from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I have not seen this anywhere among the bones here, as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I have not thought that it was this, but rather because the woman was of old age, with dry bodies and exposed veins, and in this appearance, there is that mutated warmth felt.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this appearance does not occur in those who are delicate and have humid bodies of constricted veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And as you wish to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, do not appear at the bone here as we have said, but rather strengthen him and loosen him, and dry him over that area where that mutated warmth is covered, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see this among the bones, then cure that with exclusion of the body and that which expels mutated warmth, and carminatives those with foul pills and serapi pills and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From extraction of sage.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sage is diversified according to the species, and according to the locations of the body in which they are found, because of their diversity, some have large points, and small, concave, and deaf, and they are solid; and from them there are three angles, and from those that have tongues; and from those that have stars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	When it comes to the second part of the body and the feet in which the pain is caused by two methods: firstly, the main members such as the brain, heart, lung, and similar organs; and secondly, when pain occurs in any of these members and appears to you as a sign of death, the cause of which you should recognize and treat appropriately, if you do not see these symptoms in the majority of cases, and if the pain is not hidden deep within the member, then you should remove it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When symptoms occur in the servant's body and pass through the bone, and are above the skull, which is above the brain, due to severe shock, scotoma, vertigo, pain in the neck, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of anger, and great swelling and destruction of the voice, and a white humid substance similar to pus appears at the wound site, and the flesh becomes similar to adhesion.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	If you find yourself in such circumstances, then refrain from the cure and extraction of the thorn, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the thorn is close to the heart, it is close to the right breast, and feels like a hard cause, not a soft one; and the movement of the thorn is similar to the movement of the arm, and comes from the black plague, and that freezing sensation in the extremities, and sweat, and shivering; and therefore you know that death is approaching.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the thorn has pierced the lung almost entirely from the black buboes of the plague, and the veins that are near the neck have become inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they breathe heavily and ask for fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the thorn pierces the vein that is in the chest, and the pain is close to the small ribs, and it causes great and sudden pain and a loud cry, and does not spare all the members of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the sage is placed in the stomach, then the person often vomits undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the sage is placed in the abdomen and left there, then some undigested food, or cloth, or intestine that has been ruptured, and no hope of healing is expected from its removal.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the sage is placed in the bladder, and it disrupts urine flow, and causes some harm to the parts affected, and often causes great pain to the patient, then you should know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other members, such as the face, neck, shoulders, back, ribs, breastbone, and spine, and similar parts of the body, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the sage does not pierce vein or artery and is not venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will advise you of that which I have seen about these sages, so that you may know what to do for the cure of this disease.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	When a sharp object pierces the eye of a person in the corner of the eye and is removed from the other side, after the gray matter of the eye, it heals without causing harm to the eye itself.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And another sharp object pierced the eye of a Jew in the gray matter of his eye, after the eyelid, and the object was already hidden and not achieved from that but a small end attached to his cheek, and it was a very sharp object among the sharp objects of the Turks, like a lion without eyes.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The Jew healed, and there was no harm to his eye from that incident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And another sharp object pierced the chest of a Christian in his heart, and it was an Arabic object, and it was this one that had eyes; and then he inserted it between two fingers, and it was already submerged in his chest; and then he skillfully removed it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	Guessed translation: And another surgeon was called to a man who had fallen on his abdomen, and it was thought that he would die from that; and since he had not moved for thirty days and nothing happened to him due to his condition, the surgeon inserted a tube into the wound and drained it, and he was cured, and no harm came to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	Guessed translation: And later a man was found with a wound on his back, and the wound had become infected on him, and after seven days, the wound became red in the middle of the cushion.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	Guessed translation: And a woman was found with a wound on her abdomen, and the infection had spread throughout her body, and she did not change her condition in any way, and the woman did not suffer from some of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	Guessed translation: And another man was found with a wound on his face, and the infection had spread throughout his body, and he did not feel much pain, and similar symptoms to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	When the spine of the man from the prince's court was dislocated in the middle of his neck and had already begun to decline towards the right side, the entire spine was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	He was called for treatment of it within three days after the dislocation of the spine.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then he again applied pressure to the spine; and then he inquired of that one with subtle touch, and did not feel anything; but he felt the point behind the right ear, and then suspected that that point was at the end of the spine.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And he applied heat to the place where the beneficial and digestive virtue was located, believing that this place would help him to find the location of the spine, so that it could be separated from that point.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And he did not find any significant accident in the place where the spine had reached that point; and he continued to apply heat to it for several days without any accident; and the swelling remained there for several days until a day when the spine returned to its own neck, and he told me this.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you place a dressing of sharp, corrosive medicine on the wound, and apply the tent, and again, hold the tip of the delicate needle, which adheres to the skin.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you adjust the dressing in the opening of the wound for that sharp medicine, which I can see from my position, and continue to apply it over a period of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the wound has become larger, and it is possible to insert the forceps into it, continue to refine and engineer over it with fine tools, until one day you can hang the forceps from it, according to the shape of those in the end of the capital, and then extract it; and then restore the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And according to doctors' judgment, the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and you restore it and the wound becomes consolidated, and the patient is cured completely, without any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some herbs for which you can apply that rule and meaning over that which I have not mentioned, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by narration nor are they comprehended by those who have the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the craftsmen understand comparison by few words; and they understand what is present over what is absent; and in a new operation and new tool, you must descend from the external causes of the art when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore, you should say that herbs are not extracted from the members in which they are fixed, but by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which it is inserted; or by the opposite of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is extracted by the place where it is inserted, or the herb comes from in a fleshy place, and is attracted and extracted.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the time at which it is catched, then wait for several days until the flesh that is around it rots, and be alleviated the attraction of it and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And if it is placed in the bone and does not obey your commands, leave it there for several days and apply that same cautery attractively and moisten it every day, and it will eventually be removed.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey your commands, after several days, carefully drill through the circumference of the bone in that part of the body, and insert a thin needle into that location where the bone is widened by the bone, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the bone is stuck in the skull and has already proceeded into one of the intestines of the brain, and appears in the patient with those accidents that I have mentioned, then stop the extraction of the bone and leave it there until its position is equalized after several days; because if the bone reaches the cerebrum, the death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the bone is not stuck in the body of the bone but only on its surface and does not pass through to the cerebrum, and the patient remains well for several days, and nothing happens to him from those accidents, then carefully apply the cautery and moisten it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If the tooth is stuck and does not obey your extraction, then administer forceps in the circuit of the socket as we have recommended, and then cure the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the socket is already filled with the body, and is causing pain, then inquire about that tooth, and if you feel it, then use appropriate instruments to extract it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot extract it due to the narrowness of the socket and its length, and there are no nerves or veins involved, then make an incision on the gum until it is wide enough and possible to extract the tooth.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have forceps that can be used, then remove the flesh in which it is stuck from all parts and make the necessary preparations; and apply these to the escape of the flesh through the fracture of the forceps and the twisting of those until it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the tooth in any place where it is, then use your hand with forceps to all parts until it obeys; and apply subtle techniques that the tooth is not broken and that it is made difficult for you to extract it and for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot do it at that moment, then leave the parts that are in the circuit of the patient to heal for several days, and then repeat that which is usually done.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If the patient has fever, then administer the medicine that we have said for cure in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your skill in the beginning of veins or nerves, or of cord, and administer medicine in every possible way to avoid the danger; and do this with ease, tranquility, delay, and firmness as if you were doing it yourself and according to your recommendation.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore you should make the danger disappear because the patient is in the form according to which you should make the removal of the danger in it, which is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	If the danger is caused by the other part, or if some part has previously affected another part, or if it causes glibness of the exterior of the danger because of the feeling of the part below the proposed code and sometimes that eminent; then you should separate from that; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps take them; and then administer that, which is made lightly to ease.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bones, then twist the second contradiction before the sap begins to enter the bones, and enlarge it, and then remove it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Or leave it for several days, and then insert it again before it comes out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the sap is in that place, then push it against the bone.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If it has fallen and you want to administer an injection, then insert it into that place, if it is hard, puncture the concavity so that the hollow of it enters the coat of the sap and then push it against the bone.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the sap is concave, then push it strongly into that place, because the sap is attracted by that place.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the sap is poisoned, then cut out all the flesh in which it is located, if it is possible, and then treat that place with what is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the sap is in the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is close to where you touch that place, and if it is possible to cut above that place, then cut above that place and be careful not to damage a vein or nerve, and then remove it, and afterwards cover the wound if necessary, and treat that place until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Shape of forceps that are used to grasp the bones:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	With their sharp ends like a beak, which are made like a vice when placed on the bone to prevent it from being loosened.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And among them are made special, large, thin, and flexible ones, according to the amount of the bone's size and its thickness, and the width of the wound, and its construction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of a concave mallet with this end curved like a hook to push the instrument into the bone and strike it.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of a striking mallet:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like a hammer to push the instrument into the bone and strike it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of vein puncture.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of bloodletting, which are usually punctured for bloodletting, of which there are sixteen in the head, two pulsating veins that are called "alhasisain"; two herbs that are on both temples; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two teeth that are called "aspicientz"; and the prepared vein at the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two veins that are at the collar; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called "algelic" —; and there are two veins that are below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	When the veins that are cut in the arms are visible; one of them is cephalic, and it is called wild; the people call it "the head vein", and it is deaf, and it is a migratory vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that one to the people "vein of all the body", and basilica is the vein that is paused in the domestic latrine, and it is called "citillar", and they name that one to the common people "vein of the belly"; and funis del bras, and it is paused over the fire, and it is the one in which it is cut, and it is the one that appears on the foot for apparent manifestation; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the inner ear and the smallest ear, and it is in both armpits.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the thigh there are three veins; one of them is that it is placed behind the curve of the wild latrine; the second is sophena, and its location is behind the thigh of the domestic latrine; and the sciatic vein, and its location is behind the wild latrine; and in the thigh there are other similar veins.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The swelling of the veins that approach the arteries is ancient and migrant, and it causes headaches and old ulcers in the bad head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of sanding those is second that I recommend to you: it is that it should be rubbed on the patient's head, and it should be rubbed on the patient's head in the occipital region where the veins are ample with good friction; then strengthen the patient's neck with a band around which appear the two and their locations of not being close to the arteries; and if you feel the pain of those, here is a remedy.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the surgical needle, and it is the one that incises, and you introduce it behind the vein in the groove where the fleubotomi comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand over the vein and the groove above and incise the vein at the incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make it as deep as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then apply strong pressure on that area to make it heal.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And earlier in the beginning of the book, they mentioned those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The veins and arteries that lead to the temples, which are mentioned in ancient and evil methods of phlebotomy, are often overfilled with acute and excessive fluids.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is as follows: press on the patient's neck until you feel the veins appear, and then demonstrate their location to the assistant; and afterwards, you will perform it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you lift the cotton above the vein at the parts indicated by the assistant, insert the phlebotomy needle, raise the vein, and incise it as you did in the other veins; and make the blood flow according to the quantity needed.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then loosen the bandage of the patient, place the assistant's hand over the vein for an hour, and then apply pressure and strong pressure on that area to make it heal.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And if it is preceded by their memories, and of those who start, and they attach to the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the incision of the vein of the forehead is approached to the incision of the cephalic to the ancient diseases of the face and to the emigration and ulcers with bad odor.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of that incision is as I have recommended to you; it is that the patient should bend his neck with a curved instrument, which is called a fossor, and then take the instrument, which is called a fossor:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	And place the point eminent at the top of the fossor on that vein and pierce it with a pen or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish; and then remove the perforation from the patient and bend it into that which is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some incisions are opened at the forehead, but do not let that incision be of acute extremity as with other incisions, before the extremity, and incise it according to the transverse, which is placed and very hard to cut through in the incision when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the swelling of the two veins that are near the lacrimal ducts of both eyes due to scabies in the eyes and inflammation in the eyes, and facial diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the fleam is that the patient should bend his neck forward and lean on something, and then you should be standing over his head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And if the fleam is done along the transverse axis a little above the fleam, where there is no flesh; and if the fleam is sharp, it will cut the end of it.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood run until it is necessary for you, and place your hand over those parts, and stretch them with a newt, and then remove them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the fleam of the nasal vein be compared to acute fever and violent sweating, and facial diseases and migraine and inflammation that occur in the face, and especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the fleam of that is that the patient should bend his neck forward and lean on something, and then take his nose with your left hand, and take the sharp fleam long and put it in the middle of the top of the nose along the straight line, where the vein does not appear from there, and where the blood begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	When you have finished massaging the patient's feet little by little and applying the appropriate remedy according to your need; and then apply that to an ulcer, which is usually restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The use of foot massage for the treatment of diseases such as arthritis, beginning with leprosy and various other illnesses and skin conditions, including herpes zoster.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the foot massage for those is that the patient should lie on their back with a blanket; and the practitioner should be at the head of the patient, and the patient should be lying on a bed.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then massage the vein along the leg with broad foot massage little by little; and extract from an ulcer according to a warm quantity or according to that which is necessary for that; and do the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then remove the blanket and stretch the two veins with a firm pressure so that the patient is not frightened, and leave them in place until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the use of the trocar for veins, especially in cases of small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, gum corruption, bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the trocar for those is that it is made by you, and strengthens the patient's mouth with a bend, and then rotate the lips of the patient and look at two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the color of each of those, and that is more so in the circle of those small black veins; and then insert it into each from the beginning.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is doubt about those, and you do not know which of them is, then first you understand the incision of the larger of those, and the most obvious of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the likeness of the two veins that are in the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary to incise the two veins that are located on the thigh.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	It is customary to use the lingual fleubotomy of the cephalic vein at prescriptions that are located in the gullet, to the patient's uvula, and to other mouth diseases.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of performing fleubotomy on those is that it follows the patient between your hands, holding their tongue up, and looking at the veins from both sides, and the color of each is declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform fleubotomy on each; and be careful that your hand does not touch those veins, as they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are fleubotomized in the code are the same as those in all men, and the fleubotomy of them is done in two ways, either they put a lemon or olive oil at subtility declining; or they cut the fleubotomi with a knife, and apply it to the wound, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this illness is called section according to the specific size and thickness of the veins and according to the structure of those parts.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of fluoroscopy for the neck:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	If the thickness of the veins is as it should be, then open the concave veins that are full and proceed with the veins that contain thick clots.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of fluoroscopy for the elbow:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this fluoroscopy is of smaller size and more subtle endings, and it is suitable for fluoroscopy of thin veins that contain thin clots.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The main vein of the fluoroscopy is the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: it extracts the clot from the patient's neck and collarbone, and from that which is attached to the chest and stomach.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is suitable for the fluoroscopist, when performing that fluoroscopy, to guard against that and have a slight fear in that, where there is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the fluoroscopy, he will cut that artery and cause blood flow, so that he does not perform that fluoroscopy with a sharp point, before slicing as with the illness.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear due to an obvious manifestation, then let that go and move to the other, or surround some of its branches; or use forceps in place of the hand, as it is manifest; and remove it with forceps as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you want to use the forceps for the metacarpal bone, then let the structure of the arm that you touch the location inside until you know the location of the wrists, and place your hand over it; and bring the arm and remove the vein with a concave blade using forceps as we have said; and be careful not to perforate any space of the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, with strength of the ligament, inflation in the location that you have placed your hand on, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flowing in the forceps as with the ear of an infant, and the blood is thin and red, then know that it is from the artery; and then cover and place your hand on that for a long time; and remove the forceps, and if the blood is abscinded, because it is abscinded, then strengthen the arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And guard the patient from the cold of their feet, and be overly cautious of them and do not allow that for several days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the abscess is not lanced, and sometimes when you must not present medicine to that, then insert the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity of it is contracted, and the abscess is lanced; or take scissors and cut that, and take one thread and strengthen that over the location of the vein with stricture descent and the pulvils inside the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the abscess is lanced, it is good; and if not, then cure that from which it was preceded by the remembrance of the location of the powders for the abscission of blood flow.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the lancing of the blood from that is difficult in certain positions for the small location of the wound and the possibility of the vein of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	If the vein is dark, the fleubotomy is very useful to extract the blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; for that which is composed of basilica and cephalica root, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And approach the person who is most afraid during the phlebotomy of the patient, because they are close to a vein; and then adjust the puncture for the phlebotomy and avoid the vein, it will cause great pain to the patient, and it is difficult to heal them, and often they are not completely cured. And this vein appears when there is a sensation of pain; and if it is hidden from others and is subtle and not shown, then approach the phlebotomist with the one you used for the section of the arm, and avoid the vein with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then puncture the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The drawback of the phlebotomy of the vein in the head is that it causes pain in the head and contributes to the patient's fainting spells.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And approach it in this way, if you want the phlebotomy to be done with an olive or a myrtle leaf; because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not touch the artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	May it be understood that the lumbar puncture that you have should be done by someone who knows how to do it, not just puncturing the back of the neck, but rather surrounding the area more closely, and not hitting it, unless it is the first attempt at a lumbar puncture, in which case some practice may be necessary.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, if the abscess is in a man who has not been lumbar punctured in the first attempt, then it should not be noted in that abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the lumbar puncture in that case and its consequences should be considered in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is the one that you know that lumbar puncture is not administered except for the preservation of health and hope for it and caution against the occurrence of diseases, and that lumbar puncture should be done in one of the veins that are in the spine; they are: cephalica, fusca and basilica; and that lumbar puncture should be done at the beginning of primaviera, after breakfast in primaviera and autumn, and in winter near dinner, when signs of replenishment appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And perform a bloodletting procedure, and the third day at the time when the first pain has passed for three hours.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	When bloodletting is administered, when it is convenient and necessary for that person, at any time of day or night, in every hour and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And that no bloodletting be performed until the age of fourteen, and that women not be bled except in the fourth month up to the seventh, and the elderly who have passed sixty years should not be bled.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wants to be bled for any reason, let them first consult a doctor, and if there is a wound in the area where bloodletting is performed, hold it with a leech, so that the veins do not draw too much blood during bloodletting, which is pure, and does not harm the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And those who are not bled should not be bled for drunkenness and gluttony, nor to escape from illness or intoxication until they have recovered from it, nor for hydrophobia, and more that bloodletting is feared in approaching colic passage and vomiting, and in abdominal pain, and in multiplying gout and work and exercise of meals or vigils, and for any cause that dissolves its virtue, whether corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And then consider the elimination of humors that cause this condition, if the stool is hard, with food and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then proceed with the bath and if there is no cause that prevents it, or if it is exercised by some exercise to facilitate the elimination of the stool.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And then pause the feeding of the patient in his chest, around the hour of noon, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And then perform the feeding of the patient in that day from all kinds of animals' sufferings, such as anguish, anger, fear, and all kinds of bodily accidents, such as labor and excessive pain, such as cuts and similar things to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his bedside, make present the causes in the form of herbs that usually men have an aromatic taste and smell and baths and similar things according to their quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the feeding on a cushion that is put under or the cushion of the patient who should be fed.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then remove his arm, and scrape that area with your hand or three fingers; and then tightly wrap the cloth around it and bandage those wounds.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the structure is too tight, or the structure is too loose, or the structure is superfluous, then do not allow any fluid to flow from the wound; or if it is a swelling, then do not allow any blood to flow from the wound.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then remove the structure, so that the person who should be bled has their hands placed flat between their legs, and their fingers spread out, so that the veins are inflated and declared to the senses.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the bleeder should take the bleeding cup and place it on the patient's arm, and place their finger over the vein, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is set so that the vein is like a string fugitive from the bleeding, and of those that are full of blood and when the bleeder stops over that area, the bleeder should move away; and if the bleeder does not touch the vein, and if they do, that one is strict.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, in order to prevent the apothecary from being stopped and troubled in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then remove the apothecary, but if the vein is punctured in a wound, then it is; and if not, you repeat that other wound nearby that location for a short time, or over the inflammation, if the location is not infected.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is infected, or the patient becomes feverish, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because it would cause more pus to accumulate, nor would it enter into the wound.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the apothecary if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the wound is small and heals slowly, and you fear that it will not heal completely, then you repeat the apothecary in that area again, and apply a little bandage to the wound, and do that inflammation until the location is infected, because the location becomes infected in some people with a small amount of bandage.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	If that person has already had an abscess, do not touch it, as there may be some cause that does not allow you to; and instead, place a piece of cloth over that part of the wound, which would help the body to heal.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better in this case to use oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, administer oil to all phlebotomy, which veins drain the blood from the body and perform this procedure tying and binding when placed on that part of the wound, as it helps the wound to heal and rotate when it is large.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess forms in the location of phlebotomy, which is caused by bad wounds, and especially in that person who has not bled but only been treated with that remedy, or in the puncture of the vein, and then you cover it, and place a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen it for an hour, as it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And then do that close to the incision of that vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is any blackness or greenness in that place, do not do it; and if you want, place some cause of willow and of mint dissolved, or some cause of sugar of milk or of honey or a similar substance of it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And move the swollen and elevated parts by incision of the great vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand on that, and if you later apply softness to that compression, that elevation is bad and bad; and therefore guard yourself that you place some cause of that which we have said, because it will greatly flow from the vein.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make an astringent in that which is stipative, so that the place is hardened, and then cure that with another cure within which it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And then do that outside of the vein to all people according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color which remains above the vein as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	When the bone is black, let it lie undisturbed until it is rotten; similarly, if you see it large, let it lie undisturbed until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, let it lie undisturbed until its sharpness is dulled.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And apply to those who are tall and strong and have a need for bone extraction in a surgery, that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomist be left-handed.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in those who are thin, do the opposite of that, and apply that they be extracted in surgeries, and that the wound be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of vein is that it be transverse section, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy saves from blood flow and from injury to nerves, and it is more praised and safer than second-hand phlebotomy by latitude and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	When dizziness occurs due to phlebotomy, and you want to cure it with a small amount of wine infused with milfoil or simple ox gall; extract it from the wound in three or four doses.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is complication of the complexion, then use the infusion for phlebotomy with a decoction of mallow or with a honey infusion aromatized with species such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or with an aromatized and fragrant honey.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If there is dizziness due to the immediate removal of blood from phlebotomy, and it is caused by the loss of a certain amount of blood, then use a small amount of water with meat broth and an aromatic honey; use the aromaticity with an appropriate herb, and let it lie on the patient's chest.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of dizziness for its relief.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to dislocate their arm and dissolve their second rib, use the same method for rapid evacuation, as the virtue of it is free, which evacuates the small intestine gradually, according to the amount of its virtue in consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	If whoever wants to dislocate their arm and break their second rib, and if their heart is strong, then do that for seven hours or nine of the first bleeding.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	If whoever wants to pull their intestine in the opposite direction of the part where it descends, use that on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	If that person in whom the intestine has already been cut and sharpened and causes a high fever, use that on the intestine in one method and pull it out in large quantities and amplify the perception before the syncope occurs, so that you have preserved all the conditions of bleeding; and place your hand over the foot of the intestine of the person, to prevent them from dying in a state of syncope, as many methods end up causing that when the bleeding specialist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	When you want to remove the arm and evacuate the second stage of the blood, since the orifices of the vein have been closed and it has been difficult to release the blood, which you press with great force and bend it excessively, that is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having entered the vein with a second-stage needle; or remain that which is coagulated in the orifices of the vein from the blood; or place over it tyrannical alfarach, or sagzenea, and press that with light pressure until the blood is out and stopped.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if you need to evacuate the blood again and there is no excuse, then you should sign that in another location or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis del bras" is punctured in the location of the fusca or basilica, when they are not discovered or hidden, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the patient's foot is that the patient inserts their hand into cold water until the fire cools and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then apply pressure on the area with the stricture, and use the footbath second, not horizontally or secondly along the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make the opening wide and use your footbath on the joint of the hand, a little bit.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the urine is prohibited, then you wash the hand in cold water and let the urine flow into the water until you achieve your purpose.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from washing the hand in cold water, and the same is placed on the body of the urine in cold water during the time of winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The footbath of this vein is safer than all other veins, because it has not been beaten or pinched.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The footbath of the little toe of the hand is similar to the cases of the foot.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the venipuncture is that you strengthen your hand on the arm or on your hand, so that you have it in the elbow, while the vein is inflated and demonstrated at the same time; then insert the needle horizontally; and if you do not feel anything, then repeat.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And remember that you do not leave your hand on the needle, as it leaves the patient's nerves exposed to flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then repeat your hand in the elbow and let the blood flow into that, as if you do not repeat it in the elbow, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted according to the amount of need, then place your hand on the vein and salt, so that it does not congeal constantly; similarly, cover what you do in all straight lines.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The amount of blood extracted from the needle on your right hand is equal to the amount of blood in the patient's body.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same in the other foot, as you did in the first.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The juvenile of the saphenous vein in the foot is to the evils that are in the part behind the knee, as its evils of the greater, and retention of menstruation, and the evils of the ronches and ulcers of thighs and knees, and their similarities to the evils.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the foot is that the patient inserts his own foot in warm water and makes the friction over that area where the veins appear; and he ties it at the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the place of the vein is to be kept apart from the said point, and from there its branches extend on the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then perform the foot massage on the widest branch behind the knee, which is better and more salty.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform the foot massage on the surface of the foot, then guard yourself from the nerves that are behind it on the surface of the foot, and place your foot massage over the area where you want to insert it, as if you wanted to puncture it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the bleeder be present.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the discharge of pus is prohibited, then wash the foot in warm water and let the pus flow out through that opening.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the bleeder makes a mistake in the first attempt, then wash the area with salt and do not be afraid of the malice, but protect your nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, do the same for the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the sciatic vein, the location as we have said is behind the talus and in front of the posterior crest of the ilium.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the pain from the bleeding of that vein is at the back of the thigh when it is pierced for drainage.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of that bleeding is that the patient enters into a state of shock, and quickly and forcefully pulls out the cushion from under the thigh on the outside of the posterior crest of the ilium, with a long, thin thread, so that it does not appear.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then use a boring instrument along each rib that is possible and according to the transverse line, which is better; or incise it from the beginning or separate it from the end, where the location of it is salt.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And this is often in men more common; and if you do not see it appear all at once, then use a boring instrument on some part of it, and that which appears on the back of the foot is called the auricular and annular.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and let the amount of blood flow as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then remove the structure and place your hand over the location of the boring, strengthening the location, which is usually healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of the uses and qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Uses are of corn, or of earth, or of ivory.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And use is made in two ways: one of them is the scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is the use of scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation that is its scarification is done in two ways, either by heat or by fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the locations where ventilation is administered during scarification and extraction of sand are fourteen parts of the body, one of which is where the ventilation is placed, and the last part is at the back of the head; and the middle one is two parts of the neck together; and ventilation behind the mandible below the mouth; and ventilation with a spoon; and ventilation with a lancet, and it is on the tip of the coccyx; and ventilation with two tongs, and it is on two ribs; and ventilation with two needles; and ventilation with two cups.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And the ventilation does not extract the sand from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason it does not cure for those, as it is done by phlebotomy; nor does it cover that the ventilation should be made with heat or fire in any malady made for compression between when the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If necessary, it is recommended to administer this remedy throughout the entire hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of the month and at some point in time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	These are the symptoms of men in which the disease is often multiplied within a short period of time, and it is necessary to extract it by ventosacio and atroba in their own head gravity and soda; and of those who have replacement and pain in their face and in their head, and in their neck; and of those who have pruziment in their face and forehead, and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and of those whose location of ventosacio is affected; and of those whose taste is multiplied; and of those who have sanc in their mouth, or whose tongue is apostemada and excretes sanc; and of those whose sleep is multiplied, and of those who have pain in sleep rogor and antics and plagues and other causes similar to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it occurs in some cause of those, and especially if it is in the third or cheek of the face, then command a ventilation to be made rather than after two or three hours have passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the advantage of ventilation of the nape is that when it confers gravity to the head and causes it to swell at the temples, but rather than that, it should be an evacuation of all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is in the location of the phlebotomy of the cerebral.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not appropriate to use that which is of complex breathing, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore do not use that of the old, and in the heads of which there are illnesses that cause them to swell.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But rather than that, it is done with continuous breathing over it; and therefore it is appropriate to command the ventilator that he pause his hand a little away from the ventilation at the parts behind, in order to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	May the vinegar of alkali be used instead of phlebotomy of the femoral vein and the basilica: and for that cause, it confers asthma, and the constriction of the lungs, and the scission of the stomach, and coughing, and the replenishment.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And if the vinegar of alkali is applied too much, if it is left on for a long time, it causes weakness in the body and the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the vinegar of alhagdahan confers the accidental pains in the head and the obtuse pain, and emaciation, and prophasis, and the pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And if you command the vinegar applicator that they do not press their hand during scarification so that it does not pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the vinegar of the mouth confers alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar to those of the evils that are in the mouth, and it is in place of phlebotomy of the hawthorn that is in the upper lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the ventilation that is made on the two spoons be compared to a cap, which is made for the purpose of retaining heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of the two parts taken from the forks is greatly beneficial for the opening of three veins, such as the basilica, fusca, and cephalic, which attracts all those small veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins from the other larger veins until it reaches the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the ventilator that he does not proceed too much in incision, because the place is exposed to flesh, and leaves his nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And there is a ventilator that is blown on the buttocks and compares to the emorrhoids of the buttocks and ulcers that have been left.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And cover that you command the ventilator to be a large ventilator, and of iron, because the place requires strong section; and it is necessary for the subtle blows to be opened and to be incised during the incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	When the patient's bed is too low, it causes the spine to straighten, relieving old pains of the hips and back, and bladder; it provokes menstruation, and relieves constipation and abdominal pain; it is used in place of flebotomy for two sophenes, and hydrotherapy, and for two cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, this method weakens the whole body and causes syncope in some people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the low bed, the patient is lifted to the level of the bed of two cavities.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the bed is that it allows the patient to lie down at the beginning and rise slowly, and not prolong the position of the bed, but pause it frequently, and remain in it constantly, so that the humors come to the place by equal advent.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already reddened and swollen, and that the pain of the spine appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you should shave and carefully cut the skin in small pieces, and then consider the arrangement of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man who has thick flesh, cover the wound with a large bandage and do not change it, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the fan to blow air and hold a cloth to facilitate the shaving.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the skin is too thick, then cover the wound with two bandages, because in the first bandage, the incision for the artery and its moisture is made.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second one, the examination of the thick skin is made during the extraction.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the skin is very dirty, then make a thorough shaving in the third bandage to get rid of it.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to remove the skin piece by piece or a small one, we need a shaving.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to remove a large piece of skin, we need a large shaving; and if we know that the skin is thick, then cover the wound with a preliminary shaving.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term for incision in which is the depth of the groove so far.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the person whose groove is thick, hard, dark, and their pores are narrow, then it is recommended that the locations of the windpipes be more smooth, wider, and more resolutely opened; if it is in the summer, use olive oil with aloe, or violent, or amellas dossas, or camomile; and if it is in the winter, then use olive oil with narcissus, or lily, or camamilla, or sanc, and similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and freezing, then use olive oil with amaranth, or olive oil with balsamita, or olive oil with aloe, or olive oil with anethi, and similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the windbreaker is of wide pores and thin flesh, then it is recommended to prohibit olive oil, and it is recommended that for these locations of windpipes, they be washed with warm water or freezing cold water of saltwater, or warm water of bordolaguas, and similar.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the patient's skin is of moist nature, wash their armpits with vinegar or a solution of myrtle and sumac, similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the patient's skin has thick excess, wash their armpits with vinegar of ancient, or water of sassafras, which is majorana, or decoction of anise, or camomile, and similar to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And cover that the armpit should be kept dry after washing; having covered it, it should be administered immediately after bathing for an hour or two, and cover it with the armpit.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is that by which one should be guided to wash the armpits before bleeding?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And cover that if the person who will give the blood or the one who will bleed is angry and has a sharp and inflamed skin, then cover that he should take cooling causes, such as vinegar of milkweed, and vinegar of anise, and lime juice, and julep, and similar to those.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And place their food and meat with spoons, and cooked vegetables and similar dishes.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And of that which is cooked with rosewater and sugar, or with the juice of semolina, sumac, and some other fragrant spice between old and new; and that it should be recommended to use little wine and food, and place the dishes of soup, meat, fish, small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And that on the day of the Epiphany and of the Physician's Day, the wine should be greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And that it should be given in wine to some men at certain hours, such as alcohol, or medicaments of musk, ground musk, or alcelita for the Epiphany or for the Physician's Day, so that the main members are comforted and that the wound is subtilized; and not that they take that scalfatz.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May the wounds that are caused by scarification be placed on the legs, and above the feet, and above the knee, in the places of the joints, and the pixida of the wide, because these members do not suffer scarification over them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those but rather for the relief of joint pain, such as a loose bandage around the breast in case of swelling of the joint due to fluid in the joint of the knees; and they use that to dissolve the swelling from the member, such as a bandage on the belly and umbilicus; because that rarefies the member and draws out the fluid and relieves the pain that is resolved by the swelling.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is placed on the ribs when they are injured or punctured, because of the strength of the bandage, it quickly heals the injury and eradicates the puncture from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, when it is placed on the foot and ankle, it drains fluid from those areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these bandages are administered with success only when they are applied with heat. Some bandages are administered with cold.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some bandages are administered full of tepid water in the swellings of the ankle.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is why the bandage is full and large, it is only water or water in which herbs suitable for that purpose have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The form of a ventouse administered by fire: the width of the opening of two fingers, according to what we have formed; and the amount of the pulp should be the greatest of one palm; and it should be on the side of the patient, in the place that is in the circuit, the greatest of him, the tube should be small according to the quantity that enters into it an needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of wax or citrus, with thick edges, lion-like, equal and rough so that it does not leave the member in its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it should be at the side of the patient, a transverse bar of wax or iron, where the candle is placed against the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this ventouse should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and the pouch smaller than that according to the diseases and the state of the one who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The ventouses of children and the weak are different from the ventouses of young people and large bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of applying this ventouse by fire on the member is that it extends the muscle by fire decently, with a small candle of wax, and place it on the side of the transverse bar in the middle position of the ventouse, so that the fire is lit around the part that was not burned to prevent the patient's body from being burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then place your hand on the patient's body, and the cautery on the area we have mentioned, as soon as you hold the ventozas and do not open the cautery and let the steam escape from that area, then the wound will eventually dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then apply the second medicine according to your method, and repeat that if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In a poultice that is administered in the case of pleurisy, use water, which does not have a transverse or diagonal line, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the body only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this poultice, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in most members, but in the members where it is not possible to position poultices, such as the gums and similar parts; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the nose and similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodsuckers that are in the dirty waters of poverty.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then remove their dresses and place them in dirty water until they are famished, and do not let any cause remain in the belly of those; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with a fleam and with lancets; and then rub the patient's member until it becomes red; and then place your hand on them.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to scratch the place with a lancet, it is better in the beginning.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the place with warm water and a little vinegar; and then rub and extract.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body of the patient is prolonged, then place the cage of bloodsuckers in the water, and let it soak; then you should put a cloth of freezing water on top of that until the soaking is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the swelling is multiplied, then powder it with tristanite or vinegar and similar substances according to the causes of stiptics until the swelling is broken; or place the most mature beans that have been cooked on the spot, and let them be left there until the beans adhere to the spot, and then break the swelling.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, perform transfusion of blood from suitable donors, when it is possible to change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if blood transfusions are prohibited from suspension, then rub the spot with recent blood or insert a needle into the spots until it is no longer possible; and then place them, as those who have previously felt some blood immediately start to bleed.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to stop, powder those spots with a small amount of tristanite aloe, salt, or ashes, and they will stop immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	And now begins the treatment of the third part: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental displacement of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, child, be wise and know that many foolish doctors and common people and those who sometimes do not follow the books of the Ancients or read one letter of them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	For this reason, this method of the sciences in our land is kept secret; and I have not done so at any time; and I have not admitted to it, but rather because of the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science of them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then direct your attention to experiments and studies throughout the length of your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described all of this in this chapter, which contains the greatest science and upon which I have conducted my longest experiment; therefore, I will reveal it to you others and deliver it from that occupation of elongation; and I will make it clear in the end of revelation; and I will show it in the end of declaration; and I will form it into several forms of the instruments that are administered in that, as is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter One.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections on the fracture of bones, from those that are necessary to mention before we begin to remember the memories of broken and different limbs of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of which in the beginning is sufficient for the craftsmen and at that time on the truth of those; so it is you and others who know or learn this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore say that when something happens to someone with fracture or dislocation or torsion or crushing, it is necessary to begin with the incision of the flank or opening of that, or whatever means, if no cause prevents, as with the weakening of virtue, or that which happened to them, or old age, or time of great heat, or great cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with speaking of certain herbs and meats of birds and crabs; and prohibit large meats and fill with foods and all food that fills the veins of pus, until you are sure of abscess caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their first regular position, which is usually the one they were in before.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so, as the broken bone begins to be restored, it is customary for the patient to be fed nutritious food that is heavy and difficult to digest, such as their food made from wheat flour, water, rice, peas, cow's milk, yogurt, fresh meat, and similar heavy and thick foods, and this diet is made by coagulation of fracture more gently and more often.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that bones that break in men who are in the first stage of their life and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature by the drying out of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are continued and consolidated according to their nature all the time by the drying out of those members, and those that continue and are consolidated at the end of the softness, such as the bones of infants.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	May nature adjust and anesthetize the affected bone, which is fractured in any part due to a similar cause such as gluttony, where it becomes swollen and strengthened, adhering to the surrounding tissues and bones, through which venom of strength and firmness enters, like fire at the beginning, until any cause does not prevent its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this cause, it is necessary to place the food of the patient, which has gravity, viscosity, and heaviness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Great variety of fracture according to the variety of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the types of fracture are different according to the variety of members, for example, the fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the skull; and the fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the arm; and similarly, all other members are different from each other.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have remembered all the types of fracture, explained in its separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Great variety of fracture in this case.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	There are various types of bone fractures in their cases; some are arc-shaped fractures, others are star-shaped fractures, and some are longitudinal fractures. Some fractures are due to the stage or asthenic constitution, and some are not. This is also the case when preparing to write, and there is a fracture with displacement in the head, and a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	In every case, there is a proper pain management in the restoration of the bone after its distinct memory comes back in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Great severity of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	For that reason, bone fracture is recognized by its deformity, and the feeling of pain when touching it, and its location when compared to the other side.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, if there is no deformity apparent in the location and it is not caused by touching the bone when it moves and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is a twist or small fissure, where you cannot reach it with your hand and compression of the whole; then place something on it from the medicines that you remember at that moment that suits the area; and keep it straight by a subtle restriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	You should know that when the place is bent and does not split into two or another thing that does not occur in its entirety, as all parts of the patient are covered, then you should start from your own time to correct the previous that happened to the postema caution.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if the postema caution has occurred, then leave it for several days until the postema ceases; and then equalize that second by whatever method you can of lifting and of pressure.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	You should know that the restoration of it and the adjustment of it is lighter than the bone in which the injury occurred to the body.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then use that second when the memory of it returns.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the bone is injured, then it is necessary to extend this member broken in two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or if your hand is small; or if two cords or one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place your position at the same location as the member, while the parts are extended from the member sixteen, then perforate those additions and return them to their places one by one as you can in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful not to injure the patient with your operation or cause any harm; and perforate according to your strength that you apply one bone to another as a companion according to the best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And cover that in that hour you touch your hand at the right place, and if you see any different cause here, correct it and equal it according to the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors who move too much cause abscesses to occur or cause contractions in the member as we have seen through their excessive movements.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And approach the member, approach equality and proper operation and structure of that member, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient on that and make him understand that it does not harm him in the hour of his vigils and sleep, and see his rotation and agitation, and control all his movements at all times of his virtue; and wait until the position of the member is a position that ensures pain, which causes this because when feeling in the disposition of the position of the member or injury; then cover that with another position of that one that does not feel pain; and guard that that position of yours is straight and equal, so that the member does not suffer tortuosity when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the fracture of the limb depends on which one I recommend; because you know that broken limbs vary in their appearance and size and shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small like the arm and the hand and similar to these, it is customary to cover them with very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those that are large like the cushion or the chest, it is customary to cover them with a thick and durable bandage, because the lightness of the bandage connects the large member strongly and equally in all parts of the fracture, so that there is no macula.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then, as you begin, your equalization of pressure, place the bandage appropriately for that fracture, over the location of that fracture with three or four bandages after the member has softened; and strengthen your hand a little on the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then go to the most sunken part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen it so that your bandage does not focus on the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then approach the broken area with a bandage, and gradually soften the structure little by little, until you reach a large part of the area.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other wound over the broken area, and gradually approach the bandages to the part behind the fracture; and your operation should be in the structure of the bandage and in the softening of the second one that we have mentioned in the first bandage.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place your hand between the bandages of the lion or cloth that is equal to the twisting of the fracture, if there is twisting in it; and if not, do not place your hand on any part of it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place your hand on the other bandage, and gently press on these sharp bandages as soon as possible, if there is inflammation or abscess in the area; and afterwards place your hand on that which secretes the abscess and which removes the inflammation; and leave it for several days; and afterwards strengthen on that.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And if the cannula of the needle is made of iron, and well formed; or of wood; or of palm fronds; and let the width of each cannula be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, make sure that the star that is placed on that fracture is thicker and longer than the other stars, and the length of the star should be according to how it is attached to the member in magnitude and proportion; and strengthen the stars with another bend according to your first structure; and apply the bandage below as we have said of structure, and make sure that your structure is according to the location of the fracture, and the longer it is from the fracture, the less strict the structure.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And make sure that the threads are thick and thin in subtlety, and they should be of silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen by the operation of some folded threads of cords of silk being pulled through the loops, and it is a great error when the structure is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	It is not appropriate to use very thin needles, because you will not be able to pierce those that you want due to the stricture, and there should not be any gap between one needle and another of the same size.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is pulled towards the stricture by the extremities of the stirrups, then place your hand between the toes and the ankle to prevent them from being harmed by that.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are caused by impacts, and some occur in the spine, and you will find a remembrance of that in the second singularity of the capital.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that all limbs do not become straight on the first day after being broken; this is because the limb, when it is large, does not allow for any pause on the stirrups but rather approaches within 5 days or 7 or more, according to your safety from the risk of abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the method of plaster casts that the Ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Hand cream like a remedy for restoring fractures, suitable for certain complexions and especially for women and children, which is applied to the area where there is no heat or moisture: and it is made from powdered flour, and the flour is mixed with the movement of the mold in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if it is not like that, then grind the herb of wound, and place the compensation of the unspoken or subtle; and then use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another remedy for restoring fractures and dislocations and twists: recipe of asafetida, of lobelia, of acacia, of elder, and myrrh, which is made from milkweed root, of all one drachm. x; of mullen and aloe root one drachm five; alochil one drachm twenty; all their crushed and ground and mixed with water or with the herb of wound if the complexion of the patient is sensitive; and then use this remedy, which is of good composition and restores the broken bones more effectively, and confers strength to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of bandaging that helps with fractures and sprains: take equal parts of mallow, marshmallow root, and white oak bark, and equal parts of acacia and Armenian bole, 20 parts.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Grind all the ingredients in a large mortar with a pestle, and their strainers, and their powders with water or egg white, and administer it.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of bandaging for joints and separated bones, and to relieve pain in those areas and in fissures and fractures: take a silk thread and soak it in a mixture of wine vinegar and oil, and place it on the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This remedy does not have the virtue of restoration, but it is useful for treating abscesses and expelling pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of bandaging that restores broken bones: take willow bark and wild poppy leaves, grind them all together and make a paste from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of bandaging for promoting healing of fractured bones and when you want to resolve the chronic infection of an abscess: take powdered aloe, camomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of egg shells, and all the ingredients, grind them together and make a paste with water, if the member is not open.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is bled, then apply a moist colloidal or wet gauze and use it from there.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another way of making a more effective plaster for the recovery of the limb: take the roots of mallow, linden, balm, melilot, majorana, violet flowers, camomile, and all of them chopped; all of this is mixed with a wet or dry or honeyed sugar, according to the quality of the limb and its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Ypocras should not be applied freely on the limb, but a wax cake made of wax and oil should be placed on it, not any other cause; and it is recommended that it be changed between coarseness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Gualia is seen that it should be placed on the limb, for its recovery and the causes in which drying is small in heat, like milk, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Hand plaster that relieves injury and pain: take mallow, of cease, of unpeeled skins or pennyroyal, and of aloe, and of salt, all equal parts; three times the amount of honey, and beeswax, and make it into a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount should be adjusted according to the type of wound and location, considering whether it causes pain or inflammation, or if the bone is not broken, and if it is not infected, then you should not leave it for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if pain, inflammation, or swelling occurs at the location, then you should apply or remove it at that time, and leave the plaster on it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a cloth and sea sponge lion humid, and submerge it in warm water, and wring out that pain and the pain is calmed; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then place a cloth soaked in hot wine and olive oil or rose oil on it, and leave it on for a night until you are sure of abscess cautery, and that inflammation of the member has subsided, and that pain from it is relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then gently repeat that delicate structure and apply a small, not too tight bandage for your first constraint, and carefully work on that which is healing.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and the redness and the pain and the swelling and all the accidents have already disappeared from everywhere, and if you need to apply bandages and constraints, then you should do so equally as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no harm has occurred to the member from those which we have said, then do not remove it for three days or four or five or six; and some days all of this is left until twenty days after you appear by the removal of the member, as we have said, before the fracture adheres, and it settles on the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust in the constraint more than in your first constraint, and adjust in the increase of the food of the patient, after it is preceded by his remembrance.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you see that the location of the fracture has already dried up and become more extensive than it should be, then know that the nourishment should not reach that place; therefore, apply a cool, smooth liniment to that area for the entire duration of the treatment; and this should be done for three days in total; and gradually loosen the restriction, and for this operation, the nourishment reaches the member, and it is healed more effectively.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	If that which the foolish restorers of the broken member do not restore to its original state when it is not healed, according to the correct method, and if they restore it according to its tortuosity, that is also incorrect according to their operation, and there is great fear that if that is done, it will increase the ancient evils in their free works and harm them.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do that, so it is more reasonable that they should not do that.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter two: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are varied, and their shapes are different, and their causes are distinct, because some fractures are caused by percussion of space, and the percussion penetrates all the bone into the marrow, which is behind the bone, just as it does in the staff, and for that reason this type is called ascial; or the space enters a certain part of the bone, and enters the flesh of it and does not pass the incision through the back of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the severity of these two fractures is great or small, and of the fracture that is contracted or atrophied; and the cause of it is percussion with a pole or stone, and similarly.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is so deep that it approaches the peritoneum which is next to the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of the fracture that is bent in the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and for that reason this special fracture is called hairline.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this fracture is made by impact or percussion of stone, and similarly, which makes some bone plate enter into the fractures, and it is made in the concave place where such accidents occur to the ribs when they are struck and the fragment enters into the fractures.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is more commonly made in the bodies of human beings, such as their ribs and skulls.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these special types of fractures are stable, as if separated by stitches.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you will find the removal of everything in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you will recognize all these special types of fractures by detection on those and by investigation of their attempts and the corruption of flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And a special type of fracture is recognized by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and it is cleaned, and it is applied to the attempt, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider the initial symptoms of the patient, and if you see by the symptoms that mean manifestly by fever, such as vomiting from colera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscesses of the mouth, and sincopi, and acute fever, and inflammation of the joints and pain in those, and similar to their symptoms in the major dispositions, they are not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see that the symptoms do not correspond to health, then you should begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	When this cause occurs, if it comes to you in the beginning as it is usually found and it is in the days of winter, then study the position of the bone during the day number fourteen, completely arranged.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then study the position of the bone during the seventh day, having that which is left of the pancreas be corrupted, and that accidents occur as we have previously mentioned.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the pancreas, covering the brain, and is small and atrophied, then study the incised part, divided and atrophied, according to what I will recommend to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you raise the head of the patient, and discover over the bone according to custom and your possible method according to the figure of the wound, and that it is lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if an accident occurs to you in the detection of the bone, flow of pus or abscess cautiously, then you stop at that place and wait for it to be over, and fill the place with linen cloths infused in wine and olive oil, and make a dressing on the wound until the abscess is sedated, and be sure of flow of pus; and then begin in the circumference of the bone and in its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first way is that you insert the bone with a straight instrument like this: And then administer another instrument, narrower than the first one.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then use the wider instrument again.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should have different sizes of instruments, some wider than others, and some narrower than the others, and their tips should be sharp or made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them to facilitate percussion on the instrument so that you do not hit the head and cause damage.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is hard and tough, then pierce it in its circumference, where you will insert the instruments called "non-penetrating trepans".
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And these are not called anything else but those that do not penetrate the end of the bone where you will place them, so that the trepan has a rounded extremity or margin on that which is left after removing the sharp edge like a margin or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the density of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is advisable to take a large number of these needles that are suitable for each bone, entering into all the tests of the brain where the end is sharp, the quantity in length and brevity should be according to the quantity of sharpness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three kinds of needles: The quality of piercing through the circle of the broken bone is that you place the needle on the bone and revolve it around its tips until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; then move the needle to another location, and pause where the thickness of the ray or around that.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert the most subtle forceps that you can over that in case of fracture, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for the disturbance of those that will appear at that, as delicate scissors and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And make sure you guard all the precautions that the forceps does not touch any cause of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus, when you have circled the bone perforation, and if it is continued with the same instrument, and then extracted, it is similar to a scalpel, but rather more sharp and more delicate than other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there is any fragment of the small bones and sharp ones, then take that which you have with the instruments; and apply it to the wound with lint and find the ones we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other method of operation is very long and frightening; and this is the word about it: it is necessary for you to begin by discovering the part of the bone in which the fracture is most severe and most obvious, before you have placed the end of this slow and light scalpel, which has the following shape:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lens-shaped fragment does not penetrate any cause, and the sharp fragment is in two parts forward in length, as often; because the lens-shaped fragment should be adjusted to the bone at the face of the sharp fragment incising into it.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Approach the incision site with a small sharp knife and make an incision into the bone, allowing you to rotate it as needed, and be sure not to puncture the skin in any way, even if the doctor is very skilled and knowledgeable; certainly, if he is asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If there is any cause for anxiety about the skin around the bone, make an incision at the end of the knife that is lens-shaped, and remove it easily, as it is removed from its harm and its fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the skin, and whatever is cut or stopped from the bone is the face of it, and it is rough and has subtle edges, then you should remove that roughness and remove those edges with fine razors for which you have prepared a number, of various quantities so that you can administer them in all places as conveniently as possible, and the most suitable of them second, in which you lost your operation that bone was broken and the figure of it.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you should administer in your ratio the medicine that you use to thin the bones at the beginning of those razors, and then use it close to the most subtle part of it, and do not cease to do so until you reach administering the thinnest and most subtle of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In each of the other small fractures and thin fractures, you should administer treatment according to that which you lost for the rectification of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And if it is not caused by all those that have been studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And you should refer to that which we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the bandage is removed when you remove the bones, then you should take cloth of the second amount of the wound, and submerge it in rosy oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled, and submerge it in wine and rosy oil, and place it over the first cloth, and do this as lightly as possible without causing pain to the patient.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Let that person rest from this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess being safe; and then remove it and administer medicines that increase moisture, such as linseed and flour of eggs, and powder of escharotic, aristologia, and similar ones.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And if you make these medicines into powder that is ground on the surface, as they are dry; and generally, administer all of this medicine of property of which it is that removes and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard yourself second that the wound in your cure is not infected; and it is not in the surface of saliva or other; nor do you allow to add virulence in it; because when it is adjusted on the brain's membrane, it corrupts that and poisons that, and harms the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And apply it on the head's temple, as from there the bone is formed and more when it is pressed during the cure of it, and it is black on the surface of it; and therefore consider that if it happens to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is paralytic all over.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If no other medical treatment is available and the one used is effective, then take a piece of honey and four pieces of clove oil, place them on a cloth, and place this over the wound; and care for it with the appropriate healing methods until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	About the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You should know that the nose is not broken into two pieces equally, but rather one piece is more rounded and has some bone, while the other part is cartilaginous and does not break easily and only changes in shape and size.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two pieces is broken, then introduce the broken piece back into the nose and align it with the fracture using the other piece, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this with your hands to facilitate the operation and be careful not to cause any harm to the patient during the procedure.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and it does not permit to see through that area, then cover it with a small round piece.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the same thing.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And cover it with a bandage for the restoration of the fracture on the first day after the injury, if possible; otherwise, approach the seventh or eighth day and apply the healing ointment to the wound.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert a piece of cloth into the tip of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or place two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and let them fill up to such an extent that they block the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And tell the ancient healers that the splints should be wrapped in bread and changed daily, but I have not seen this; instead, cover the cloth with a piece of compressed charcoal powder to help the bone heal and strengthen the cartilage.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some bandages should be inserted into the nose, in place of a sponge, instead of being wrapped in a cloth of lion's mane; and if the fracture of the nose is very violent and the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; if you want to do it, then do so, and if you want to make splints.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another bandage causes an abscess, apply a plaster to the nose with wax or with a solution of honey and rose oil, or with diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if no abscess occurs, then cover the wound with a plaster made of starch and powdered ivy leaves and egg white; and place it on the lion's mane cloth, and do not let the nose come into contact with any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken or fractured, then cover them with a plaster and remove those with instruments that are appropriate for those; and cover the wound, and treat it with something that heals and consolidates, and with a suitable plaster.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If there is bleeding from the nose, then apply pressure with cloths and administer tampons of lead into it until it is completely stopped.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture does not cause pain, look to see if the fracture is only slightly deformed and not completely separated into two pieces, but curved to the parts inside, then it is not displaced.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is in the middle, then introduce your finger into the patient's mouth on the left side; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right jaw, then introduce your finger into the patient's mouth on the right side; and push against that softness of the fracture from inside with your other hand on the deformed part of the bone; and gradually equalize both sides.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two pieces, then apply traction to both parts in a straight line until it is possible to equalize them.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a dislocation of teeth that leads to their displacement, then use those that are hoped to remain intact; such as gold, silver, or cedar; and place them on the broken jaw, and place them on the doubled cloth, and place them on the large sheet that has been properly made, or a weight of equal length to the jaw; and hang it above the second one according to what you have prepared for its application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and find tranquility, and place a drink of lion's saliva on their lips.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the body has been altered in some way, then remove it on the third day; and correct what has been altered from it and apply that with powder of millstone, egg album, or cisami flour, before you have removed the bandage from it, and place a lion's skin on the application.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then with this annex and adjust the application on it, and if the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it until it is healed and strong; for this fracture is usually healed in three months.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another complication occurs with an abscess, then administer the same medicine that we have mentioned for other complications in its treatment until it is healed, and let that abscess remain.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is severely displaced, then consider whether the separated bone is short or long, and if it is short, then use a device that is suitable for removing those from instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the openings of the wound are narrow, then use a forceps according to the amount of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have reattached those separated parts, and if those do not remain, then widen the openings of the wound if they are not already wide; otherwise, place one of the suitable dressings on it and cover it until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the wishbone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The wishbone is broken at the part where it connects to the shoulder blade, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When the bone is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not match; and it is easier to restore it; or if there are fragments in the wound, and it is difficult to restore it; or if the fracture is complicated.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	In that case, the operation in which the fracture is complicated, you should have two assistants, so that one holds the broken furcula and follows it, and the other stretches the neck to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then align the fracture with the ribs, before it is made in the shape of a second rib, and not in the elevation or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then cover it with cloth or wool, and its size according to the amount of your need; extend and elevate the broken furcula and tie the cloth to your hand until the fracture is aligned in the shape of a second rib.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot tie the end of the furcula to the parts forward, so that it reaches the pronator, then cover the patient with a pillow on their neck, and place a larger cushion over the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant pushes the muscle of the patient to the parts that were inside when the bone of the furcula was raised and placed on top of it, and then you correct the fracture and equalize it with those called tendons.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel pain in the furcula and its muscles, then cover that area and remove those pains for ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is held in the bone, then you make an incision in it with one of the scissors that you have prepared for this, because you have placed under the furcula the instrument that serves the chisel; and this instrument is a hammer or a hammer of which this is the shape of it:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a mallet of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to that which you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the weakness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	And its length should be according to what is possible for the operation; that it has two ends, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the splinter of the bone is wide, and it is certain of abscess formation, then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear abscess formation, then fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the size of the wound's opening.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess forms, then pour in some cloth soaked in warm water and rose oil, and place it on the affected area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the structure of the bone when it is cut and separated, place a poultice made of flour of milled wheat and egg yolk on it, and place it on the affected area. Then place a piece of soft cloth over the poultice, if necessary, and then apply humate, which is a long strip of linen, about one palm wide; and then place powdered duplicatz on the poultice and the cloth; and then place a thin tablecloth over it in a drap, and place the tablecloth over the location of the fracture; and then apply humate as it is soaked, and roll it up on the neck of the patient and under the chin of the patient, and then place it over all the parts. And when the structure of the fracture descends, and that is what is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And even if the splint above the broken bone is not maggot-infested; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the bandage becomes soft or you replace the splint, then you should straighten it again and strengthen the fracture.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's pillow on their shoulder, and place another pillow under their arm to support the patient's arm on the side of that one, so that the fracture of the clavicle at the elevation of the muscle is elevated; or the arm of the patient is placed on the shoulder of that one.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not change the bandage unless there is an abscess or pus in the place within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen the surface of that at this, and adjust it to the fracture and restore it until it is restored and the fracture of the clavicle has coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some changes are made in men of that time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of a broken shoulder joint.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A splint is broken in the wrong place and not at the fracture site, but on its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	Therefore, when the splint is broken at the wrong place - and it is broken in the right place - and it is not known except by touching, then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare the splint and reduce it to its natural shape in any way possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then place a layer of powdered egg white and lemon juice on the fracture site; then place a layer of doubled cloth on it; and then place a thin layer of table salt according to the amount of the broken splint or more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the layer is concave at any point of the splint, then level that concavity with lemon juice, and then place the layer evenly.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then apply pressure above with blood-letting to prevent the swelling of the layer until it is not removed from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the bandage on each day; and all the time that it is softened, tie another bandage and strengthen it and equalize the pressure if it remains in its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the patient on their left side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spoon is restored in 10 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and make sure that it is not from the bones of which its beginning was not feared nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the location of the bone and place it behind the chain, then you cut it on it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio de apostema caut if something happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The chest is broken in the middle of its location and that part remains unchanged; but the ends of it are somewhat attached and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	When the patient's leg is broken, it bends towards the sides and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, cough, vomiting, and fever; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of the broken bone is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a cushion is placed between their shoulder blades; and then the muscles are pressed on the bone, and the ribs of the patient are adjusted to the position of two straight lines, and the operation is performed according to all possible and appropriate methods until the figure of the bone returns as it was.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place a poultice and bandage over the broken bone, and place a soft cloth or a piece of calico over it to cover it; and then carefully apply it to the broken bone so that it is not painful; and when the swelling subsides, strengthen it with a suitable support; and consider the swelling at all times, and when it becomes soft, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to remove the bandage or compress that was previously applied, causing pain, swelling, abscess, or other issues in that area, then you should remove and discard it, and apply a new ointment to treat the issue. If necessary, reduce the pressure of the bandage, and adjust it until the patient is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the ribs when they are punctured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You should know that fractures of the ribs do not occur in the larger, stronger parts, but only at their ends, where they meet the lungs, and these parts are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And if the patient is not conscious due to the pain, you should perform the examination without their knowledge or consent.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be done in such a way that it matches the fracture as much as possible, and then covered with a bandage, and then apply an ointment and splint to support the broken bone, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the rib fracture is declining towards the internal parts, the patient experiences severe pain and puncturing, similar to the puncturing experienced by someone who has cried out, and because of this, the bones are covered with a bandage; and they experience difficulty in handling, coughing, and vomiting, and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ancients had methods for treating such great pain.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they said: cover the patient's belly with warm and moist cloths to generate inflammation and moisture, so that the belly is swollen and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the external parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we do not do this because it is not a cause of pus formation that could lead to abscess, unless it has already occurred; and if it has already occurred, then we help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they said: place the patient on their back and bring them close to a strong fire; this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the fire will draw excessive heat to the wound due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they say to the patient: cover that place with wool that has been submerged in hot oil, and place powder between their ribs until it is full, which is as heavy as when you wrap a second layer; and then cure the patient with the care of pleurisy from food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient is strongly constricted and has not suffered from it, and the bones push the bandage against the puncture, then cover the patient, and discover the broken rib, and place your hand over that instrument which contains the cipher, the memory of which is preceded, and cut the bones to facilitate its removal.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the torn lips of the wound, if it is large, with suture, and treat that with ointments until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess is formed, then you should cover it and insert powder in hot oil and place it over the wound, and treat the patient with that which covers the abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him lie on his left side while he is sleeping until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the sacrum and coccyx.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and they are often accompanied by their attachment, and similarly to the sacrum of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when such an accident occurs to anyone and you want to know whether they will be healed or not, consider the following: if their bones are already softened and stupefied and dead and cannot move them or extend them or strengthen them and when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain in them, then know that they are not healed, and in such cases the prognosis is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they feel pain in them when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see similarities in the sacrum of the neck and want to know whether they will be healed or not, then consider their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you notice that it has already softened, then apply those things that are usually applied to the muscles, and when it is on its back, it becomes relaxed and unable to urinate, and some patients turn over onto their backs and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and therefore do not treat it.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If none of those things happen, the cause is better and less dangerous.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment of it is to apply a poultice made of bread soaked in rose oil or mustard plaster, or some other medicinal herbs; place it on the affected area for several days until the abscess is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And later apply one of the comforting and existing plasters, and strengthen it on that area; command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where the pain occurs until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if the tissue of the bone is affected or some other cause that has already been separated from it, then apply pressure on the wound and remove that bone; and then adjust the edges of the wound, using sutures if necessary; and then care for that area with some healing ointment until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the back of the thigh bone is fractured, and it is at the end of the spine, then enter your left hand into the anus, and balance the broken bone with your right hand as much as possible for equality; and place a poultice and bandage on it, if necessary, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel shattered bones in it, then treat that, and hold it, and cure the wound with the cure that is preceded by it until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the restoration of the wide.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the ribs are broken, and if they break, then the fracture of them is only communication at the ends of those and are inserted in length and decline to the parts inside; and the patient feels pain in that place and puncture, and the cushion is surprised when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it so that it is over the fracture, which is its figure.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is only in the end of it, then you equal it to the second one that you have at hand for equality, and enter as much as it is necessary to be assembled to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the long or that already declines to the parts behind, then you make the patient lie on their belly until they are prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have equalized that one, place your hand on the plaster, and place your other hand on that star of wood or of codeine, and strengthen for stricture on the one that you do not fear puncturing of fracture or removal of the star.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And equal the hollowness with that which placed that one inside of which that fracture has the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their side or on their back.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if there is an abscess, then you stop the extension of it and the restoration until that one is sedated, and place your hand on that which is preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen that one with a cover.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If there are fractures or dislocations in the bones, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the humerus.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	This is the part that is between the ribs and the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you hold it like this:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And if it is attached to two ends of two bands, and then suspended from the raised place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And the patient should lie on a bed; and then remove the broken arm over the splint that reaches the tip of it in the middle place where the curve of the bone is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend something heavy over it, or the nurse extends it to the parts that are behind; and then the doctor should put something in between the fracture as soon as possible until the fracture returns as it was before.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other handmaid should place the patient on their back and support their head with a cloth; and then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds the pillow behind the patient; and each of them extends their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then place your strength on the fracture with the cloth and on the other cloth, and each of the two ministers extends their part.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then cover that half of the cloth over the wound and the other behind the fracture on the side.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is on the side, then cover that cloth over that place and on that side.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Equalize that with ease and effort, and when it is applied according to how it covers and is applied properly, then apply strength to it if there is no pus caution.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If an abscess occurs, leave the restriction in place until the seventh day, and place your hand on the wound to prevent it from reopening until the abscess heals, and then you should strengthen that area.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of strengthening that area is to apply a plaster on the fracture, and then cover it with a clean cloth; and then place your arm over the support, and place your hand on their muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And then cover the cloth and strengthen the arm over the support to prevent it from becoming weak, unless there is some cause for the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And then place the splint that is closest and strongest to the others; and between each splint, leave a space equal to the thickness of the splints added together, three times the width of each piece.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen over the splints with the restriction that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And ensure that your structure over the location of the fracture is straight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And if the fracture is more elongated, the structure should be smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you see the position of the splints and the structure as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its usual position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear abscess, then leave the structure and the splints in place as we have said for day seven.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days to prevent it from happening in the location or inflammation; or eating is prohibited to come to the member because of the disposition of superfluous structure; and therefore adjust everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are sure that no cause of this will happen, then do not remove the ligature for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And the patient's head should be on their back, and their hands should be over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place your hand on the helper full of wool equally, and consider in all hour of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not melted or dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, therefore adjust everything according to your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And pause the patient's food according to the order we have given, unless the food is delicate at the beginning until it is started to be strong; and afterwards cover that food with a cloth.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	It is customary for the helper and the servant of the patient to be strong for 14 days; and afterwards cover that food with a cloth, and administer it washed and medicated with those remedies that rectify that one.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is not united, then do not remove that bandage and those splints within one day or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called two bones; one is small, and that is the one that secures the wrist, and the other is large and that is the one that is placed behind the small one from the wrist upwards.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the larger bone or the smaller one is broken alone, or both are broken at once.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small intestine is cut above, its restoration is difficult, and its healing is even more difficult.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the large intestine is cut below the fracture of the patient, its healing is bad, and its recovery is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse when two bones are broken.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is cut above the small intestine, it is advisable for the doctor to facilitate its healing by applying a small extension as soon as possible.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large intestine is that which is cut, then it is necessary to apply a more forceful extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both intestines are cut at the same time, then it is necessary to apply a stronger extraction.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary to place the patient's hand on the extraction and the extension of the intestine on a cushion, with the fingers above, not like all the others, and the ear should be lower than the others, and the patient should lie on a pillow that has been placed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion under their back or head, so that the patient does not tire.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the assistant extends their arm on the side farthest from the patient's hand or head, and another assistant extends their arm similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor adjusts the bone as best as possible according to its figure.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are thorns in the surface of the bone, then you should carefully remove all of them from their location with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears to be a separate thorn that pierces the skin and is not within your hope for its restoration, then you should do something on it and place it according to the method we mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is widespread, you have already done something similar to that, and therefore take care of that treatment.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should apply a cloth made of olive oil and white wax, and it should be thin yet strong, and place it over the subtle structure within which the abscess is to be covered; and then remove the cloth and apply a prepared plaster made of powdered myrrh and clay, and place it on the fracture.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you know that the number of the ribs in the arm is in the major positions, or if it is a fracture in one bone or two bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your bandage over the location of the fracture as strongly and vigorously as possible, and when more of the bandage is above the fracture or below it, place the bandage a little softer than it was previously mentioned in the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft cloths, and not hard or rough, and the best one is the one that is strengthened just enough to move between being thin and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and the limb nearby those days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if something happens that requires correction, such as the one that happened to the member, and then make sure that you immerse the member in water before it stops that problem.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And do not keep the member pressed until it recovers, and then return the bandage.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the contraction has already been softened and the bone has already regained its shape and appearance like those, then with your skill, correct all of that.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive stricture, then gradually loosen that one a little and allow it to heal for several days until the nourishment can reach it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	However, if the patient has not experienced any of those causes that we have mentioned, then do not allow it to be discharged within 20 days or around those days.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And have the hand of the patient suspended over them by their skill of moving it, and make that one sleep on their side.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you will know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or if it is well-healed in 28 days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the conditions and the dispositions of the skill.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of the broken pinch of the hand and those.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You should know that the joint of the hand and the knuckles of those are often fractured, but this does not happen to them unless there is a strong impact.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand is fractured or injured, the patient should lie down and keep their hands at the same level, and place your hand over the extended one.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the assistant extends the broken bones and the doctor aligns them with good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then place a bandage and hold it, if there is no pus carefully; and place this above according to the size of the wound, and you have already wrapped that in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the splint is in the parts of the belly of the palm, and then make something similar to a bandage, and command the patient to hold that on their palm splint; then it should be strongly bound with the cloth long.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if the patient's chest is covered with cloth in which they are lying, so that the chest can be applied to the palm; and strengthen the second one that covers.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is at the front parts, then place your hand over the other cloth on the part that is underneath, so that the hand can be opened and straightened; and then place the bandage, as if it is rolled up with the hands between the said arm bones.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if the fracture occurs in one of the said joints, then if it is said to be broken, then cover it as soon as possible and strengthen it with the palm and if desired, place a small straight bandage so that the fracture can be elevated and not become deformed.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	And if the fracture is in the other said joints, such as in the wrist, or in the elbow, or in the ear, or in the ring finger, then it should be covered and tied with the said bandage that was used for that; or all of them should be tied continuously, and this is better; or place over that small bandage, as we have said in the wrist.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and approach that, the arrangement of an abscess cautery and oppose — against the surgical operation — against that which covers when something happens to one of those, according to what is related about it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the bone of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh are broken and it is declared to the sensation after it is converted to the part where it is most painful.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the bandage is applied over the fracture and another bandage under the fracture, and the patient lies on their back and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And the assistant extends the bandage to its part according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is planned to the thigh's joint, then the bandage should be placed on the knee to the part of the femur, so that the extension can be in its place, and the other bandage under the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the fracture is towards the knee, then make the bandage prepared for the knee, and extend it to the parts nearby.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And if the doctor is able to place the bones in their natural position and the bone is joined by good connection; then cover it with a plaster and bandage, unless there is an abscess in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if there is an abscess in the member, then leave it for several days until the abscess drains, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage of the fracture should be made as follows: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it twice or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the calf where it meets the thigh and the back of the knee.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And introduce a long felt between the knee and the calf towards the knee, and the ends of the felt should be from the most upper part of the two parts, and then wrap it over the calf and the knee what remains excessive from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place your hand on the cushion in the location of that fracture, and place one stone on the bones of the bed.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the empty space between the bed and the cushion with many cloths, to prevent the contraction from coagulating.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin the contraction strongly from the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you approach the edge of the fracture location, your contraction should be smaller and more loose and moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend both ends of the strap to the parts where it reaches the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the stones on the other side so that the cloth does not remain in its own location.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then lay the contraction on that, so that none of those things happen to the member, corrosion, abscess, inflammation, and similar to those; and if any of those things happen, then count yourself as having removed it from there, and rectify what happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is fractured where it breaks, then try to align it as much as possible; if not, break it and return it to its place, and treat that which is preceded by a memory of healing within which it can be cured.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And some bands are strengthened with this fracture of the cushion or another that is adjusted to its steps, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of it in such a way that it does not occur to the patient with paralysis; and if it is restored alone, then another should be applied on the other cushion, it is necessary that he should immediately move that which is preceded by it.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the cushion is strengthened in ten days or a few more or a few months, and all of this depends on the diversity of the conditions and other arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the knee cap.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	When a fracture of the little toe occurs, it is often accompanied by injuries to the surrounding muscles and tendons.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	However, if the injury occurs at the fracture site, it is either a crack or a tear in its parts, and this is either a pain or a severe pain, and over it all is the sensation of pain.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of it is such that it should be equal to what was broken from its parts, and it should be attached and joined together as much as possible by equality and facility and craftsmanship.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then place a bandage and place it over that round stone, if necessary for that; and strengthen the structure with it as appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended for other fractures, such as the abscess cautery and similar to those that should be applied to the whole accident as appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the knee.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the chest there are two bones, one of which is large and called the sternum; and the other is thin and called the clavicle.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And depending on the type of fracture that occurs in those two bones of the arm, and for that reason, restoration of it is made as with restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken together, the chest is converted into all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thin bone is broken, the chest is converted into the front parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the large bone is broken, then that one behind, and it is of those causes that are not within your knowledge.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension and equality and ligaments of the ribs according to that equally.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But may it be, if the fracture of the chest is not healed without having any signs of movement, then the extension should be less and looser, and it will help your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the bed, there is a cause for operation on the arm, and it is when you straighten the fingers and complete the entire operation, then you will take weights of iron that are placed next to the causes that are placed on the soles, and they are made entirely of white palm leaves; attach them to those that have a small groove, and do not be like the hands, and be the longest of those that are the longest in the bed, and of the denoun under the foot.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then cover each with a blanket in two layers according to its length, and place one on the side of the bed on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be made of denoun from under the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the blankets in three layers at the extremities of the bed and at the middle, so that at this structure the bed is prohibited from tilting to the right and left side, and it is a good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a small board of wood according to the length of the bed; and it should be placed on the bed so that it keeps the patient from moving.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	When you do this in a fracture, and when it is properly placed.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider each day the bed and study it for the next day's study, and keep it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of those causes occur, then stop that treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus and bones of the foot and those called.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Fracture of the talus does not occur in all cases; rather, fractures occur in some bones of the foot, and fewer fractures occur in those called, and they do not occur to them but rather in the same positions.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot suffer fracture and sometimes those bones are raised above themselves between them, then place the patient on his side with his foot prepared as if walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place one foot on that which is raised from those bones, and press them, and equalize them until they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then place a poultice and a bandage on top of it, and place a small table under the patient's belly with two cloths on it.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then pull the patient's leg towards the body structure below, as you have covered that area with cloths and other materials of which they are in need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when the patient has passed three or four days, then you will remove the bandage, as you found the bones in equal condition, or they were fractured or dislocated, and the operation was done with such precautions.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if you say they are fractured, then restore those, and equalize them with the other side, and recommend to you in the restoration of the mentioned method of the foot.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the fractured bone along its length, and place it close to the patient's leg; and place the table under the patient's body, which has been recommended to you, and pull the patient's leg towards the body structure below.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if that which is fractured from the bones is two or three or more, then you will place each piece of the required amount wrapped in a lion cloth on top of it, and pull the table under the patient's body, and stand on one of the tablecloths over the patient's belly to keep it warm.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is necessary for you to remember that you should not neglect all the causes that were mentioned to you in the other fractures of accidents that we have discussed; and pause at all times to consider this.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the clavicle, the scapula, and the humerus in a man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the clavicle is fractured, then perform that operation in a lying position, and gradually incline it to the side of the back a little, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife should place her hand on the clavicle of the other side, and do the same as before; and the arm should be gently shaken, and the back of the person lifted a little at a time, until the fractured part of the clavicle is returned to its position.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place cushions on the back of the person, and when they need to urinate, raise their back and let them urinate, and reduce and return that second as was done at the beginning, and then return to the first cushion.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And make this for seven days or around those, until he is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take an egg yolk and strengthen it with a strong herb through a canavera needle; and insert the entire egg yolk into the wound, and blow into the canavera until the egg yolk is inflated with the wound, where the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with cotton and kept warm for several days until he is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bones of a man or woman are fractured, then administer in the healing and setting of that bone what we have recommended for the bone of the thigh.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is directed should not be hidden in these nearby fractures and that it does not happen, mainly to the one who has some study and use and understanding of this my book; because that fracture means to you in the greatest dispositions via dreyturiera in the healing and setting of that bone, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the man's back is bent, take a blanket, and place it on his back; then cover him with a cloth, and wrap him in it, and keep him that way for three days or until he is cured.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the treatment of bone fractures when they are displaced.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the person who has a displaced fracture, and especially if the bone is large and thick like the bones of the thigh or arm, or similar to those, that you first examine them and perform amputation if the conditions for amputation are present as we have previously mentioned.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the displacement heals, then cover it with a bandage and apply a powder made of three parts sulfur to prevent further displacement.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to treat the fracture in that place, but do not prolong it if there is no pus.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If there is pus, then leave the treatment of it until the ninth day, before the pus disappears, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause further harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the bone is fractured and elevated above the shoulder, then cover it with a cloth and place it back in its position, and hold it with your hands to facilitate and minimize extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not in your prepared position and the balance of the patient, then reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight spans, and its width according to the size of the wound; and for that reason, the doctor must have three or four of these instruments according to the quantity needed in treatment for all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And if it is round, and in the small groove for the reason that it is not bent, then place the handle on it during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And if it is sharp at the end that has a margin on its ends; and if it is below it to the greatest extent, and from the top of it into the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And in Greek it is called "willing labor pain", which is a rare thing.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the patient's limb can be placed on top of the elevated part of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push it into a tube that returns the bone, and be equal to some balance.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And so force yourself to equal the limbs of the fracture between them, and if the limb of that is thinly broken, and you do not take it with the tool for good reason, then you should insert the limb of that bone into where the tool has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone to all of that, then insert it into where the scissors or saw that we have mentioned would go; or press that with one of the saws in some way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And remove those that are in the bone of roughness and small scratches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and the reduction of the patient brings great pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you have agreed upon with the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your bone fracture is healed, and then submerge it in a tight, dark bandage, especially in summer, and do not place it on a hot surface or other cause that could cause further injury and decomposition.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer splints at the time of the patient's complete healing of the bone fracture, and leave the surface exposed to avoid any infection that may occur due to the use of bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to expose the wound to the fracture, as it may cause further injury or infection, which could lead to serious complications.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the patient's fracture is loose, soft, and different from other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear any of those bad accidents that we have mentioned, and there is great pain in the area, then do not place those splints on it, but rather use a hard cloth bandage instead of splints and press lightly on those areas.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When the pain starts to occur one or two days ago, and it is believed to be caused by a fracture, then remove the cloth that was placed on the affected area, and administer ointments, using those that are customarily used to treat wounds, such as quadripharmacon and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is advised to you that you remove the bandage and consider the wound on each day at dawn and evening, until it is consolidated and healed, and make sure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pain runs from it to the parts behind, for facilitation.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound lasts for several days and it is not consolidated or healed from it, then know that this is a sign of small bones being broken, and therefore you should examine the wound to see if it is infected.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those small bones that are separated and remained inside, those that do not separate and put the member and make it impossible to move, you should incise those that are possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If the wound becomes infected with a certain kind of corruption or putrefaction, and it is necessary to apply a specific remedy for that, which was previously described in the chapter about its treatment.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And regarding that remedy in which you should use your best judgment and present your remedy: when the large pieces are cut off, elevate it over the affected member as if it were bones of the cushion and assistant, and similar to those of large members, and do not assume attraction or extraction of it, which may cause death; leaving that in place for a few days, which will help to heal the wound within 20 or 30 days; and then cure the wound if you have seen it, and if not, leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the treatment of a lump that occurs at the site of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This lump often occurs at the site of fracture healing, and more so near joints, and is shaped like a member; and it prevents the member from performing its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the wound is recent and administer medicines such as aloes, and bandages, and compresses, and astringents, and similar to those; in which you take some or all of them, and confirm that they are astringent, or albumen of egg, or astringent wine, and place that over the wound in a stopper, and bind it well.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And do not loosen that bandage for several days; and remove it and apply another, until the wound is healed; or strengthen it on that layer of plaster, which has the property of reviving everything that is inflated in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the wound has become a hard and tight scar that always provokes pain, then cut it along the most inflamed part of it, and remove the excess and eminent, or ratze that with an acid rezerve until it is healed; and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the broken bone is restored and placed back into its natural position, it is not always as smooth and flexible as before.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a broken bone is restored, and the member becomes smooth and flexible again, this is not always done for multiple reasons: one of which is the lack of solution to the ligaments and tendons of the fractured area, as they do not heal properly; or due to excessive stricture of the ligaments, preventing nutrients from reaching the member; or due to excessive use of ointments; or due to unnecessary movement at an inappropriate time; or due to weakness in the body of the patient and their overall weakened state.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure for this is to rest the patient and make their body strong again before the wound is multiplied; and administer baths; and apply compresses and lotions to it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place a bandage on the member, so that the bandage can draw out any remaining impurities, or continue with ointments and water treatments until the nutrients reach and return to their natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	About the treatment of broken bones when they are healed awkwardly and prevent surgery from being performed on them due to that reason.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When an injury occurs to a member that has already been healed awkwardly and elevates the broken bone and causes swelling, and it is due to this reason that the limb is formed in the shape of the member, but if the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, then you should not accept the word of someone who believes that the member is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	However, there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our time; and this operation is so disgraceful that it causes great fear of the death which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	However, if swelling and pain are recent, then it is advisable to apply cold water in the form of a poultice with softening herbs such as elderflowers and chamomile, and similar ones; and this should be done to the affected area. Or it can be made into an ointment with a softening ointment such as diallaquelon well made; or it can be made into a poultice with ground altea petals and mixed with honey of gualina or olive oil, and this should be applied to the affected area. Or it can be made into a plaster with fatty figures and mixed with columbine and similar ones to those of the medicines that are called consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some wounds are dissolved by frequent rubbing with a lighter oil that is very moist, and should be applied to the entire limb at all parts in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	However, if the twisting has already disappeared and is made strong and converted into bone and causes the need for surgery with a knife, then it should be removed, and the continuity of the bone should be dissolved, and any excess from the connection of that metal should be scraped off with small scissors, and it should be administered facilitation in that area with solace and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	About speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is essentially the separation of one of its joints, which prevents movement, and distorts the figure of the limb, causing great pain and injuries to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when an accident occurs to anyone with dislocation, it is necessary to reduce it as soon as possible, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very painful, and it becomes difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And to avoid any harm or strain during the time of abscess formation, as it is caused by the accumulation of pus and leads to slow pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When that happens, it is customary to cover the patient with a blanket and to allow the abscess to form; then apply heat and oil to the affected member, and reduce any swelling.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all members should be treated with the liquid that will bring relief to their location.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what was previously written in fracture; from the shoulder joint, it enters into the joint below.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the treatment of jaw dislocation.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the jaws are not treated; and the dislocation of the other is caused by one of two ways: either they are pushed out of their places due to slight removal, and they become slightly mollified; or they are completely dislocated and completed, until they are mollified at the joint where the saliva of the patient flows and that it cannot hold that nor close its mouth, and the tongue of it is wrapped in its palate.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of it is minor, then return it to its major positions as if it were a minor cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and total, then make sure that the reduction of it is administered more slowly, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And if the healer should have the patient's head, and then insert the doctor's fingers of one hand in the mouth of the patient, on the side of the dislocation of the jaw, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts both fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of the patient should be held away from those parts; and command the patient to cease his jaws and remove those from each part; and the doctor equalizes the jaw and pushes the jaw back in before it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, until it is made easier for the reduction of both and not delayed in the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so when we return and cover their groin, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then place on those wounds of cloth with ceruse, and make it from beeswax and rose-scented oil; and afterwards bind them with ease to the limbs.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient lie on their back, and their head be between two pillows, so that it does not move to the right or left; and do not force any cause; having looked at their face, then remove that which is forbidden.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with ease, and not forcefully through the opening of the mouth for food and drink and defecation, until the jaw is uninjured and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated in some hour and not converted to their proper places, then apply a cold poultice of feverfew and soda, and frequently the belly of the patient is inflated, and frequently vomiting pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see that, you will know that it is mortal; and those who die from that usually live for about ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the sternum and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The sternum is not dislocated from the ribs by its continuity with the breastbone; and some are dislocated at the front part, and that is called a rib fracture.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And its restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then apply pressure to the area with your palm with strong pressure, so that it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place a poultice and powders on that area and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The extremity of that which is bent and connected to it, is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it should be reduced and bandaged according to what we have said and according to what you have at hand.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place the bandage, powder, and compression, and command the patient to rest quietly until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And this method of treatment reduces the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its own location.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the tip of the titillus to the other part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle, and this is done by turning; and it is not dislocated behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated below by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most often dislocated and deformed and stuck behind the tip of the titillus, and mostly in those where the flesh is thin, it is easily dislodged; but in those where there are thick flesh, it is stuck out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And many men have suffered from sudden blows or falls, and the muscle of the affected area becomes infected with abscess, and it is sore because it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, you should not rush to treat that, and then proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is known when you feel the parts behind it; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the uninjured muscle; and you should examine in the hollow of the muscle head and behind the tilt of the muscle head, as if it were a bone, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to its normal position, or move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you should press or lift it, and then examine it carefully, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is called "fresh reduction" when it is recent and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the doctor raises the hand of it to the parts above; and then place your fingers behind the tilt of it, and strengthen the joint in its normal position, and the doctor raises the hand of it, and extends it in its; and then place it behind where it returns naturally.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If it does not return, and from the beginning of the accident that caused the dislocation, many days, then have the patient bathed in warm water and administered a decoction that softens and loosens, such as if their joints were made of marble, with fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then have the patient lie on their back and be placed under their neck a pillow that is even between elevation and restriction, and have the doctor place their hand on the spine to elevate the muscle head, and pull the hand of the patient so that it does not hang down, and another servant holds the head of the patient, so that it does not hang down, because at this point it returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is taller than the patient, and stand on the side of the other, and insert their muscle behind the neck of the patient and elevate the neck of the patient to the parts above until the patient is suspended in the air, and another servant pulls the hand of the patient from below their belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the patient is heavy, then it is necessary to hang something else that may cause suspension, so that the other one does not worsen, because the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And if it is reduced by another method: and it should be placed on the ground a long pole with a round head, as if with a mortar, which is not too thick or too thin, and place it under the patient; then let him lie on the head of the pole with cloths, and the patient should stand according to the length of the pole, and extend his hand to the parts behind the other part; and extend the other parts of the other part with strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a pole of the length of two arms, and the width of it should be four fingers, and the thickness of it should be thinned at the tip in this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place a clean cloth on their head to prevent them from descending into madness.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place your hand or arm under the patient's chin, and extend your hand or arm into the parts behind them, and tie their hand, arm, and elbow to the assistant and their hand and arm.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then place one arm on a ladder according to the latitude, and extend your hand into the parts behind them, and the other thing should be suspended from the other side, as the joint enters soon.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument of the patient is completed according to each possible method, and then cover with a wool cloth of equal quantity; and apply prepared plaster of pounded barley flour and albumen on all the muscle, as it is rolled up above, and place a bandage under the chin in a decent manner; and roll up the bandage over the plaster, and the hand of the patient should be attached to the neck of the patient, and let it rest, and do not make the hand of the patient sore for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is necessary that the food of the patient be placed on a tray, while the member is being comforted, because it is more convenient for their healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be given more frequently at seven or eight and exercise some movement; if it is stopped and not softened, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	However, if the joint is dislocated by moisture that happens to it or by another cause, then it is necessary to apply an astringent three times, according to what is said in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandage and splint are reduced over them for some time, and it is not healed and catheterized and cannot elevate that arm to the parts above, then know that the nerves of which, being at the top of the muscle, have been severed or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be held in place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Of the dislocation of that which is made of the chest and the breastbone or the parts behind, the reduction is made by impulse and extension to the maximum, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And it should be applied in that other structure, and cure it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing of the member is delayed and the movement of it is slow, then the patient should use bandages wet with warm water until that gravity is reduced and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and if it is dislocated at all parts, and especially at the part that is closest to the back, and the dislocation of it is not visible from where you are standing, or from the touch according to any figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the shoulder dislocated, it does not return to its place, this is a clear manifestation that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And if you cover them, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it arrives at the abscess, for if you see the abscess, reduction is difficult, and not always heals completely; and more so when it is in the parts behind, for it is worse than all the other species of dislocation, and causes greater pain, and more prolonged suffering, which may lead to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient be extended on both sides, and the arm be expanded, and the hands of the physician be placed on the back of the patient, and he should press the joint towards the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in the parts behind, then return to where you bend your arm back, and strike the back with the palm of your hand until it returns to its place.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And two assistants should extend the arm, and two other assistants hold it in that position to prevent it from moving during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then rotate the arm in all directions, as it is wrapped in a folded cloth or bandage on their chest, or on their back.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, apply some oil to it so that it helps in lubricating the joint and facilitating its movement; and then gently push the joint back into place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then place a compress over the wound that is covered with starch and lime, and extend it downwards, and hang the arm from the neck, and let it rest for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then remove the bandage; and if the joint is formed in its proper place, then remove the bandage from it and leave it there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strong enough, then apply the ointment and bandage again, and leave it there for several days until it is extended; and then remove the bandage.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If an accident occurs to the gravity near the reduction of the joint, and the position of it is in movement, then administer humidity in baths and gentle friction, and compress, until it is removed; or pause on the joint affected, this is a fatty cushion; and apply, and leave that on the bone and the new.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then place that in the bath; and when you remove it, then rub the joint with a prepared friction, and apply again on the affected area, this is a moist cloth, a woolen one, and the second, and the third, and the fourth.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	with a bath instrument, until it is softened.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, pause on that cowhide wet and scraped with bread and strengthen on that; and do that some times, because that is moist and reduces it to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is between the arm and the chest.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Sometimes the shoulder joint is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is difficult, and the opposite is true for other joints, but nevertheless, it is important to have speed in reducing the dislocation at the time when it occurs, so that the joint does not become infected or something happens in the infected joint.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of this dislocation is that you place the patient's arm on a table and the assistant extends the patient's arm, and the doctor places his hand or palm on the edge of the joint, and pushes it back into its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it should be considered whether the palm is already attached to the patient's arm, then the patient places their arm on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceded by the arm, then the position of the arm of that person should be naturally on the table, so that the doctor's hand can be on the edge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns soon, good; and if not, then the assistant should apply pressure to the abscess and leave that person; and do not repeat this, because otherwise, there is no suffering or pain on the reduction of the joint except that it passes through the days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	When the joint is second in its tortuosity; and the patient does not know any cause, but the muscle is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are trapped or torn, and they are not engaged in it but should be strengthened with a pointed cautery at the base of it and strongly heat that thing.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, when the patient is returned, place your hand on the area that we have recommended, and let it be released and strengthened for several days; and then remove it and let it be released and the muscle of the patient should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of it is stopped and it has some gravity in it, then apply that with some warm water and some friction for a few days, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the cure of the mentioned dislocations.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes these dislocations occur at all parts.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of these parts is dislocated at the back of the hand or on its belly, then stretch the part and push the dislocation of it towards the fingers, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the said person, suspend the device to the dislocated part, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend that one and extend it until it is equal to its previous day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when the first is not ready, apply the second according to that description, and do not stop removing it during the day and exercising movement, and at night; and do so for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same with that, if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the patient, and apply it to that part and do the first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly, do the same when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the spine of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When an accident occurs to one of the spine of the back or neck dislocation complete, and remains motionless for those spine from that place, then in that case there is no cure, because death approaches the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	When that happens, it is under the patient's control to expel that, and they cannot hold it back; and movements soften their members or their thighs or their arms or their chest, or one of those; or it remains a sponge in that place, where movements are made to remove those in four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	So that is now removed to the back parts and is called spongewort.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The cure of that is that you should consider whether the spongewort has occurred from impurity, because in that case it is not cured and there is no healing of all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In that case where it comes through percussion or similar to those, as the ancients said about the methods of cure in that prolix speech, which is most likely to return profit; but I already have and have improved upon that from which few are exempt from the too much of that, because of its proximity to the understanding and exposure, which he has exposed and formed into various instruments of that kind, by which he shows that and explains that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that in the case of an injury to the chest, there is no cure or healing for that part; and similarly in the case of an injury to the back.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those are not cured except by the one that happened to the chest properly, that is the one I have recommended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be extended on their face, in a position as close to upright as possible, and then stretched out with a wet cloth underneath them so that their chest is not pressed.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight stick should be placed underneath them, with their head resting on the ground at the end of the bed near their head, and another stick under their feet at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister should hold the stick, and not be still in the bed; and another minister should hold the other one according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then cover their head with a cloth and place the firm lion's tail on their forehead; and extend the end of the lion's tail to the stick that should be under their head, and tie it there; and then strengthen the other band over their ankles and under their buttocks, and support their abdomen; and then adjust all the bands and tie them to the other stick that should be under their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the assistant should extend the bandage to the part of the foot where it was placed, and not leave the two feet and the bandages of their places in which they were placed, but rather not stop there as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor should place their hands on the strong spine between the vertebrae as they return, or place one on a table, and then adjust their feet on the table before they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if they do not return in this way, then take a table that has a width or length of three brasses, and dig in the wall where we said that it should be the patient's place between the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the other end of the table on the strong spine, and the doctor should place their feet on the other end, and then carefully enter until the spine is covered and they return to their place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the chair that is rolled around the middle; and it is that you should stay on the ground with the patient's head in the back of the chair between two feet, the length of which should be one arm, and the patient's head in the back of the other chair exactly two feet; and the length between each foot should be a palm, and it has been done in each foot where the chair turns, and each should be held firmly on the ground so that it is not damaged.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be a reed in which it is turned, and it should be rolled up in the two thicknesses of the two reeds.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a thickness in which the reed is made, the length of which is a palm and a finger, which is rolled up; and in the other two reeds, it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the threads that you have stretched in the chest of the patient in the thickness which is to be put on his head, and the threads that you have stretched in the cushions of him in the roll which is to be put on his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each roll should have a minister who turns the roll on his hand, and the doctor according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the roll:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the spine is returned, and the area is covered, then apply poultice of egg white, and stop; and then place a cloth on top of it, the width of which is three fingers or about those, and the length of it is the amount that took up the area of the swelling, and on the part of the spine, it is.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then use a thin cloth that we have called a bandage to provide nourishment until the patient is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any imminence in the location at the end of the healing process, then use medicines that are moilific and liniscan for their administration, as recommended; and it is already administered in that location, a sheet of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some veins sometimes occur in the rear of the spine, and it is for that dislocation; and that bone which already immines because it does not want to be performed in that manner, this medicine will surely cause you to die.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle only occur in dislocation, and not in those that occur to the other joints with a slight removal and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, that it is dislocated at the back parts, or at the front parts, or at the inner parts, or at the outer parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is more commonly dislocated at the parts of the body in front, and less so at the parts of the body on the sides or at the parts of the body in the back.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And from the dislocation of the patient at the parts of the body in front, it is clear that when you adjust the pillow of the healthy person for the sick person, the healthy person's chin is longer and the sick person's nose is shorter than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee but must lean on their elbow, and this is the place where the elbow often gets an abscess due to pressure.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the reason why that person who experienced dislocation is at the parts of the body in front is because those accidents of him are opposite to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the reason why that person who experienced dislocation at the parts of the body on the sides is because the pillow on the other side is extended secondarily, but it does not bend towards that pain in the knee, and if it goes to go there and cannot be placed on those parts on the side; and the urine of him is retained and the swelling of him on the side is an abscess, and you must place the ambulation of him over the thigh.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And if the person who experienced dislocation at the back parts cannot expand their shoulder, nor bend the arm that bends the elbow, and the blanket under them is shorter than the other, and the elbow is softened, and the head of the cushion is placed in that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of these species of dislocation is that you consider, therefore, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already been treated by someone, then you administer reduction to it according to its arrangement, and it is not in that cure for everything; and therefore do not expect that in that one be made propitious.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In that one of whom the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should do that which turns the joint and extends it to the back parts and front parts, and both to the right and left, which strongly returns and does not require other cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Then, if it does not return in this way, you should expect that you prepare a strong cautery and extend the blanket of the part most behind, or at their hands, or at the bandage which is placed over the shoulder; and another minister extends the hand of that above so that their hands are behind the tips of it; and then strongly hold the lion's mane on the edge of the cushion, and another minister cleanses the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if it is the extension of the patient or the part behind the neck to the part of the sternum, or the part behind the back to the part of the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if it is the extension of all those in a journey until the patient is raised to his own side and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is special compared to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns to that which we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for all this that we say about the appropriate treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of his own dislocation, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the parts behind, cover that the patient is supine on his own side; and place your hand on the rim of the cushion in that place which enters the head of the cushion and the place that is left leaning; and extend the band in upwards from the angle to the most other part of the sternum.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister strongly grasps the arms of him, and presses the large place of the patient's back and extends to the parts of the front by strong extension, so that it returns to its own place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This special treatment is the most effective cure for this member that has been reduced, unlike other treatments.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	However, if you are exempt from this treatment and do not obey its instructions, then tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope, looser than others, above the ankles and below the knees.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each be equal to four digits, and let the patient's leg be extended more than the other by two digits.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then hang the patient over the top of the bench, and let them be in the highest position; and let the length of their body from the ground be equal to two elbows.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then command a strong young man to minimize the pressure on the cushion, and let another young man be suspended from the patient, and let the other young man strengthen the joint by pulling it back to its original position quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	However, in the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the shoulder joint, cover the patient with a blanket after we have recommended it to be properly humidified; and strengthen the ligament over the patient's shoulder correctly and over their chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then bring two chairs for them to sit on, one under their feet and the other under their head; and then adjust the chair under their chest, where they can rest their body covered with a blanket, so that the patient is not dampened by the chair being between their legs, as you must avoid the extension of the parts to be stretched.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each assistant extends their part, and the doctor holds their hand while performing the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you follow the reduction, it will usually be successful; and if not, pause carefully and follow what we have said in the manuscript for that purpose.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Make sure the patient does not move their arms too much.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the parts denoted, then make sure that the cushion is extended more widely, and follow this method according to the patient; and the doctor places the palm of their hand on the long bone of the patient, and holds the other hand at that point, and at that extension pauses the one extended to the parts to be stretched.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is at the back parts, do not let the patient be extended at the back parts, and elevated on the ground; having covered him with a hard cause, as if it were a mattress, if the shoulder of the patient is dislocated forward, according to what we have said about the position of the patient on two mats; and it is on his face and the limbs are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And provide compression with a cloth on the place where the joint is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then, when the reduction is completed according to what we have said — and if the joint of the patient is not hidden from you, and you extend two cushions from the patient, and when you see those equal and the patient extends one cushion and expands the other, then you know that the member has returned — and then you adjust two things and press and extend the bent part so that the limb is not injured in any of the parts; and adhere to the patient for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then remove the bandage and apply it again, comparing one cushion to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see those joints in their proper place, then know that the dislocation has been stopped, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and apply that, and extend it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then remove that, and apply it again in an ambulation over each part for several days, until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the cure of dislocation of the thumb.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The thumb is dislocated in three ways, either it is dislocated at the base, and at the joint behind, and at the joint in front; and it is not dislocated at the base.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to apply the cushion on the part; then know that the thumb is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all the patient's limbs is to have the patient lie down straight, unless they can do so; place a cushion under their head, and hold their foot between your hands; and then make the patient's hand adhere to their face, and hold their foot between your palms, and place those between their thighs for strength, and another minister extend their leg until that hand returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And if the patient's back does not adhere to the cushion, it is because the cushion is not well placed.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then place that plaster on it and make the back adhere to the cushion, and then tie those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's bed for more than a few days, until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of the patient to you is excused, then administer strong extension to the tendons of which in the cure of the hand previous narrative.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the talus.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The talus sometimes remains in its place with slight removal, and sometimes it is dislocated with the correct movement, and the dislocation of which is done at the parts inside or at the parts outside.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that sometimes the talus inflates from the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The cure of its removal is usually easy, and it is that it should be extended by ease to the hands and should be equalized within so that it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In its cure when it is dislocated with the correct movement, it should be done by the patient lying down, and he should hold that one a strong and skilled person from the part behind the back of him in the middle part of which.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you should put your left hand on the outside of the lower part of the foot, and your right hand in the place behind the heel.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then bring the foot to your right hand, and the left for two reasons, and extend the left; and push the chest of the foot towards the right side of the bed.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And then make those two reasons when you have counted them.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the chest of the foot towards the third side of the bed, and you are at the back.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, return in one or two ways with this method, and if you see the foot equal, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it, until it returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	However, if you are prohibited from reducing it to that position, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a pillow under their head, and a cushion between their thighs, and you have covered them with a cloth so that they do not descend.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the assistant of the patient holds their limbs, and another assistant extends the foot towards their hands or the cloth that lies on the back of the foot; and then each assistant stretches against the extension of their own side, and the pillow is extended between the patient's thighs, retaining that, so that the thing of the patient is not drawn to the parts behind their extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor should approach the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant should hold a clean cloth to the parts that have been dislocated, as the dislocation returns to its place.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation has returned and it is declared that the patient's health has been restored by its reduction, then apply a strong bandage to the affected area, and tie the foot to the bed.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful not to injure the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage does not press too strongly on that area and cause pain there.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it for two or three days; if the bandage becomes too soft, then remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And remove it on the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from walking for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	However, if it is necessary to walk during that time, be careful that the dislocation has not been dissolved and corrupted, and avoid that which does not require healing.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if the abscess bursts, then carefully apply what we have described in the previous chapter, in another place for healing and to prevent it from recurring, until it is completely healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter thirty-four.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the treatment of dislocations of those of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	That which is dislocated should be extended with a little force; and that is not difficult, before it.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in the back of the foot, then you should do so by placing the patient's foot on a level surface or table, and be there with him.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then you should stand by the foot, and place your hand on what is near the joints, and gently press that part of the foot until it returns to its original position and does not appear in the elevated position.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then you should place a table under the patient's foot that holds the entire foot, with two ends, and strengthen that part of the structure in a proper and firm manner for three days; and then remove it and make him walk again for several days, until it is strong and he is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter thirty-five.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the special types of dislocation that are caused by a fall or a fracture or any other way.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of those occurs, and you perform the cure and restore it, then many evils succeeding may lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that reason, do not presume over the cure of it, but rather follow the knowledge of the art, with long use, mercy and pity, not hasty, nor arrogant; and use in the beginning of medicines that cede apostems as much as possible, and leave the patient to divine judgment, unless to that one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, but rather for alleviation of the malady, and in which there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then you should try to quickly reduce it in the beginning of the cause, giving that it becomes an abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns after they want, then administer the regimen that cedes an abscess as much as possible and cures the dislocation with that which is suitable for it from drying agents.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the stable bones that are separated, then perforate their membrane, and do what we have said in simple cases of that in the locations of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid the second of that tool in the ways of fear according to what my previous preaching has preceded; because that is better for you to give to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutations to your own way as you will see those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	This finishes the words of Albucasis perfectly from which God may not be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
