O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the culmination of medical science gathered together with its applications, and I have finished it through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And in my vision, I came to understand that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is flourishing in our region and has spread far and wide, so much that this knowledge and art have been lost and dissected, and nothing remains from it except for small descriptions in old books that the hands have used.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this, errors and vanity have arisen, closing off thoughts and distancing knowledge.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I should revitalize this treatise in a single order following the path of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together with the forms of the cautery tools, and other instruments for work along with their adjustment of declaration and preparation as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no skilled masters are found in our times, the art of medicine has been lost.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the one who intervenes in this to ascend into the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as he knows the location of the members, and their forms, unions and separations of the organs, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles, and the number of bones, and their movement patterns and rest positions, and where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus says Hippocrates that with speech it is much, and with deed it is little; and in the art of hands especially.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that anyone who is unaware of the matters previously mentioned risks making mistakes and wasting people's time; just as I have seen many times, numerous individuals who interfere in this field and abandon their studies and lack of practical experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	And I saw a fool who treated a woman's neck abscess and cut the arteries in her neck; because so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in an elderly man, and the stone was large; he took with it a part of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And indeed, I have already called upon the art of draining pus, and observed the position of the illness and the size of the stone, and if one were to treat it properly they would likely die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I have seen another place where the cure was given to one of our country's Duke who had broken his leg, and along with the break there was an injury; and these places were full of ignorance causing the breakage upon the injury in various ways through strong anger, and did not leave any rest on the injury throughout; and thus ended after .i. term (3 months); and they commanded that he not break it again; and waited until the leg was fully swollen and the feet and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I have been summoned to come to him, and I hurried to come to relieve the leg; and when I heard it dislocated so much that he was in peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But any path of corruption had already been confirmed within the body or member, and could not be cured; and the process of corruption continued through the member until the limb was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see one other site that collapses an incision into an abscess, and then inflames due to the wickedness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a sore, when it is full of melancholic humor, does not require iron to be touched if it cannot be removed in part so that all the corrupted parts can be taken out.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear children, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: meaning, where there are dangers in multiple situations; and I will show in each part of this book where there is danger and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because this is necessary that you guard yourselves, so that the common folk cannot wrongly speak of you. Take your weapons into consideration, and treat your ailments lightly yet firmly, and use the best way so through the grace of God you come to salvation and be healed; and leave fearful diseases to the relief of health; and remove from those who cause you doubt the instruments used on you, have faith in yourself that you can come from this world to glory in the other.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galiens states in some of his admonishments: "Do not treat any illness wrongly, lest you be called foolish by the common folk.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medicine cauteries, and the chapters are arranged from the head down to the stones; and on the forms of instruments, and iron tools for cauteries, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are arranged with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are arranged from the head down to the stones, and include the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Just as we remind ourselves of the work, it is necessary for me to discuss the quality and harm of each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and the harm, are the longest speech and most subtle science and the secrets answered. And these were spoken about by many wise people, and they agreed with this; and their words satisfy me somewhat, for I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery universally aids all compositions or where there is matter, for it applies to two compositions: these being known as warm composition with matter, and dry composition with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the warm and dry combined with matter, there was no agreement and they said that the fire cautery is a great help; and the other ones said the opposite: that the fire cautery only helps diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be treated with heat or drying for a disease that comes from heat and dryness. And someone who says the opposite, claiming that the cautery provides great help to hot and dry diseases that come into people's bodies,
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the person and its moisture to the character of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true on every occasion through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every method, do not interfere with it unless the one who has proven it does, and who knows through long use the art of cauterization, and the diversity of human complexion. And they understand the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the outbreaks and duration; we have no fear for other complexions, especially in cases of cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all things agreed with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know this, children, that a fire-cautery contains secrets of treatments, and it brings more benefit than the burning medical cauterizing tool.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come out except from the member that is burned, and it harms no other member if I name it.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Hot medicines travel from limb to limb by repelling each other, and they bring about diseases of healing through this process; and sometimes the illness strikes the patient. Fire, due to its high quality and goodness in substance does not do this if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this through experimentation and the length of my service and study in the art, and it corresponds to the truth of things; and for this, I apologize for the length of speech, because I do not want to withhold from you the secret of fire, and its quality, how it relieves diseases of the body, as the philosopher says by demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they determined when the cauterizations should be done, and studied the prayers.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the harms arising are diminished by the aid of the fire cautery; and moreover if the cauterizations are for necessary pains that cannot wait until greater evil befalls the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think like the foolish, child; for a disease cured by cauterization has no return; and they say it this way. But it is not as they believe, because cauterizations are only medicine that alters the complexion, dries out the fluids causing pain, and is valued more than medicine for its swiftness in enhancing strength, and due to the virtue of its work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that diseases come at no time according to the complexion of the disease and its place, gathering in him excesses through the acquisition of meats and similar things. If not cauterizations administered within him where there is little excess and moisture, like cauterizations for pain and such things, then this kind of pain does not return; but it happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And there are few people who understand why cauterizations are called the ends of medicine, and this is seen; but they do not believe that cauterizations follow after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is said that cauterizations follow in medicine because when we administer methods of treatments for any illness and if they don't work, then we administer our cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Thus clearly understood, cauterizations are indeed the ends of medicine, not according to the understanding of others.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The old ones said that gold cauterizations made from metal tools are better than those made of iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and its high nature; and they said that gold cautery blades do not cause decay, but this is not true as I have proven it and found out that it is true in some people; and gold cauterizations are worth more than iron ones, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And still, when you heat the gold tool, you do not realize that it is heated by the color of the gold, and then it cools off quickly; and if it is heated too much; should be put in the fire; thus there is enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use our iron cautery that we have equipped for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	So I have ordered this chapter on the old shoulder until the elbow, because it makes finding it easier.
dou cautere olivaire	wooden cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The fire cautery works against moisture and cold on the head, and there are two ways to perform this due to illness called "soda," and because of many bodily fluids that drain from the head as hair, and ears, and due to a multitude of dreams, tooth pain, throat pain, and most especially for all diseases resulting from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The shape of this cautery is such that the patient's body is cleansed by dissolving medicine, modifying the head. Three times or four times, according to how well the properties and heat and habit of the ailment can be endured; and then again after the head of the ailment.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place it between your hands, and press your hands onto the sides of your nose; afterwards, place the root of your palm on the root of their nose between their two nostrils; and when your middle fingers arrive, if there is bleeding from this point, warm the cautery which is called 'olivare', and its form is as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place his head in its usual position with ink, and draw slowly and steadily as you adjust your hand a little at a time; then lift your hand alone, and check if the bone comes into view when you see it is only .i. sol (a small unit of measurement) underneath; if you do not see the bone, continue the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after that, take .i. poc (another unit of measurement) of flour, and place it in a moistened soft cotton inside, then put on his head, and let him keep it for .iij. jors (days); afterwards, put some buttered meal on the wound; and leave until the scalding is gone; after that treat the wound with ointment known as 'tetrafarmaçon', until it has healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if they were told by the old ones that when a wound remains open longer, more pus comes out; and for this reason it moves.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they were told that we should continue applying the cautery until part of the bone is burned; and then when what is burned from the bone has been done, it should be treated.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the other says that we must apply the cautery here and press so hard that we lift as much of the bone as one small twig would be by women putting it into their tubes for when body fluids flow out. And should we leave the wound open for a long time; after that, we must clean and heal it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good in all respects, except when there is a path of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the shoulders are weakened by the continuous drainage from nature, as we demonstrate on other limbs; and even if the shoulder of disease is weak through nature, and my first sign of cautery heals better for me, and I use this method in essence gather together salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the head comes chronic pain and lasts long, one must use the patient's herbs and pills which are called 'cochies', and treatments for cleansing of the head and ears and bandages; and if one applies the cautery as we have mentioned before, it is useful.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the shoulder of the sick is of strong nature, and it should not be too cold; therefore apply the cautery under this one for a bit as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After apply the cautery to each horn of the head up to the bone, as we said before, and do one more application in the neck area which is called 'wheels'; and do another application under where suction cups are put; and move your hand so that you don't go past the bone: the patient feels too much pain in this cautery compared to others, I will speak about it elsewhere; and it's necessary that the horn applications are more subtle than when applying to the middle of the head, and this is its form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cautery,
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When suddenly pain comes in one part of the head,
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The medicine cautery involves taking a spoonful of vinegar, and using the peel and its residue on both sides for about two inches around each head; then apply this vinegar mixture exactly where the pain resides in such a way that you can spread it under the skin; and when it has spread well, press it tightly like that for 12 hours; afterwards remove the vinegar bandage and let the wound heal naturally for another two or three days; then put on a clean bandage with butter until a scab forms.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment until it is purified; and if you notice that you are applying any of the burning medicines I have written about or the first volume on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery proceeds according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery as it is described here:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a bell or has .i. point of curvature, and in the middle there's a small appearance; put it over the painful area, and hold your hand and gently move the iron, until half of the thickness of the flesh at the knee is burned; then lift your hand to prevent the artery from burning, which has been exposed, and allow an abundance of blood to flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing this in the area to be sewn, leave it on the affected area for three days; then change to cotton soaked with butter and apply it. Continue treating the wound with ointment until purified; if you wish to cauterize this migraine using the cautery known as "cultellare" at its tip, take care not to cover the artery in this migraine that is not old.
de emigraine	Regarding the treatment of headaches,
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraines as we have previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and if it doesn't help, and you find that the heat treatments mentioned before concerning medicine and steel don't work, then you must heat the cautery called 'cultellare' until it turns white; and do this so that your tool is touching one line from half a degree long on the skin, and use your hand once, pulling it so that you don't cut an artery and stop just before reaching bone; and guard against the jaw becoming silent when eating, and make sure only the tongue is to be silent and spasm does not affect the patient, and guard against bleeding from the artery if it's been cut, or cutting with great fear and even those who are unaware of these procedures and have no experience in them; and leave the work halfway done; but I will tell you how to stem blood when an artery is cut, and show you where this is mentioned in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that the previous cauteries don't seem to help for this illness, and the patients are suffering, use them on the opposite side of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see that they tolerate it, administer the cautery mentioned in us or chapter on extracting an artery, with a two-bladed cautery; and these cauteries are better than the others and more useful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes from cold in the ear, and we have applied solutions of medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and if the pains do not subside, then heat this cautery which is called 'pains', as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the cautery to all parts of the affected ear, or around the two points where the pain is located in both ears, and then move away slightly from the root of the ear after you have marked its location; apply ten points around each ear; after that treat the area until it heals properly.
de la torture de la bouche	of the pain in the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Pain that should be cured by a cautery does not encompass those caused by pus, as we have stated in sections on diseases; and no cautery should be applied to symptoms originating from dryness and rashes of the nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this symptom of pain caused by pus from ears and nasal discharge as well as phlegm in the head and gargle, and if it doesn't respond to treatment, then it's necessary that you apply three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another a bit beyond the temple area, and the third for aligning the two lips; place the cautery on the healthy part of the body, and have the patient receive the application right where pus may be found above the ear, slightly under the head's horn, and in the temple area to a length as long as one inch; keep the cautery over this until half the inside of the ear is burned; this is the form of the application.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the symptom of cuteria which we described earlier, but it's slightly more subtle; so when you treat the hand as I explained before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When dealing with an old case of apoplexy and you treat it as we have said, if it does not benefit and the patient has a fever, then you should apply three cautery treatments: two on the two horns of the head, and one on top of the head, and one where the neck is called 'vassel' as we have mentioned before. And the fourth application of the cautery is to be done near the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have said previously.
de litargie	from alchemy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, you should give the patient large pills that purify the brain; after that, take back the head of the sick person all around, and place the camphor plaster on the occipital area; and here is the way to do cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it goes well like this, then it's good; and if not, do three applications of the fire cautery descending from head to collarbone, leaving an interval of one finger-width between each application. And treat it as with the others, and if you see that it has adjusted, and the patient is suffering, do another application in the middle. If necessary, two more on the two horns, and keep treating until it heals; and let the applications called "olive" be those previously mentioned.
de la froidor dou chief	from the cooling of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of warts and what we have discussed previously. After treating the head with the patient, then apply fire cautery around the wart and on each horn, one behind and three on the spine below the collarbone; and if you need more applications, and the limb is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is extensive, then do four more cauterizations on the spine of the back. And leave it until the most sensitive part becomes dry, and raise your hand; afterwards treat it until it heals, and let those applications be called "olive" as we said previously.
de l’epilempsie	Of the epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should only use the cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section where the patient experiences large ailments and suffers from lack of medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the child cannot endure it, make them gargle and chew, modifying the brain often with good meats; after that, insert the head halfway in water, and then apply one cautery as we have said previously, and another on the vessel, and each horn; and if the patient experiences pain, apply cauterizations like I have explained for those with paralysis and softness of limbs, on the spinal column and neck area, and use olive wood cauterization according to the method that I mentioned.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	And if the ailment is in a child, perform one fine cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy the excesses or fluids are corrupted and thickened, therefore apply the fire cautery of the parts like we have said earlier to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to the cause of melancholy, these excesses decline into melancholy and leave the body with wet malaise, then let him drink something so that his brain may be cleansed, as was stated in the previous section on this subject.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After removing the head of the malaise; after make .i. linen thread well done, as .i. circle, if you put it around the head; and let the malaise sit in place, and is held well from all sides; after apply the liniment, and use butter from an old goat; and warm the head gently so that the patient can bear it; then empty the circle from within with the aid of the head, and let it cool; and do this to each malaise once a week with different governance properly, until they are cleared.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see that burning, do it making several points across the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautering increases the moisture in the brain; and then place wet cotton on butter and lard grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the power of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the power of the eyes first arises through the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and continue to instruct the patient to consume something purifying for the head, and protect it from all moisture. Make him sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After having him drink after his head, and I have him cauterized near the head, and I perform two cauterizations on each of the two temples once the weakening due to eye power has reached both eyes together, or when only one temple is affected; and apply all the cauterization over all the veins and arteries that are within the skull, and ensure the cauterization lasts as long as the width of the temple; and guard against bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with a piece of material in such a way as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and cutting the cautery site, how to properly conduct it; every time one performs a cautery or ligature operation, do not perform it over the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the path of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes have been longstanding and accustomed, and are located on the veins, or over the arteries that are beneath the surface towards the head's appearance; one sees that they are cold excesses of phlegm, thus I apply the cautery that I mentioned at the beginning of this work concerning the descent to the eyes: .i. a cautery near the eye socket, and .ij. cauterizations on both temples, and .ij. cauterizations where ligature is done over the two bones; and if it requires more, then carefully cauterize above the eyelid with every .i. small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	through the eyes from within tears
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it doesn't benefit, then give three roes of wine to the patient. Afterward, heave the head up, and apply a cautery or olive oil in its middle; and make two applications of the cautery which is called "clavilis" on the two ears, just below the hair. And beware not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is weakened by illness and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which it is described here:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that it's been done twice with the fire cautery on each of the two nipples as long as they are there; and don't let your hand go until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the method I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	The hair that touches the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	None of the times has it happened that the hair of eyebrows turns into the gums and touches the eye; in this case, you do a cautery according to two methods: namely with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are long and even, then command the patient to let them grow in health; after that, on the piece of paper for the eyes, draw a figure so as to resemble a leaf of myrtle, and make its beginning like the sign between the hairs; then place wet cotton soaked in egg glue and garlic paste onto the eye, then heat up the cautery tool which has this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing over the figure you have drawn little by little several times, until the scabs are dry in that place; and the signs of healing from the operation are that you see the paper shrinking, and the hairs lifted to the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then place wet cotton in butter as long as the scorching is removed; after ointment treatment until it becomes clean.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if hairs and the paper become softened after this, then resume the cautery on that same spot as you did initially; and when the hairs have fallen out, cauterize until the paper rises to its natural position, is even, and doesn't stick to the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The fire cautery of medicine commands that the patient allow hairs to grow until they are large and even; then make the form of parchment like the leaf of myrtle. Then take French soap and live coal from a flame, each one of them is an ounce, and grind them together well; and make haste so it does not cool down, then spread it on the form you made as like the leaf of myrtle, put it on the paper under the eye. If the disease lasts for one day only, you must open it in one place, and if in both places similarly; and fill each hole with wet cotton similar to an egg; let the patient's head be in your healthy hands and place your finger showing over the medicine, press once every time the patient feels the irritation of the medicine, as they also feel irritation like from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then apply the medicine to your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the mordification has passed, if you lift the heel from awe, and reward it if you see that paper lifted as if it had been lifted by the constraint of fire or through an incision; and if it is like this, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is not healed this way, then one still has to apply medicine on the limb or wait for the medicine to take effect until your symptoms are equal and your eyesight's point is met; afterwards place moistened cotton in butter until the burn from the ointment leaves, after cure the wound from the grease that is called 'dyafenis' and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to take care of your work well by careful attention so that no medicine leaks into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper gets wet after that, and the hair touches in the eye, then renew the medicine on the soft part of that limb which is made moist by the clean paper; do this as you did before; cure it until it heals; and this is the form of the leaf of mirtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of humans are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints; and do not have the right way respond to him who studies this craft.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have said in the sections on diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you apply the cautery using this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in your healthy position; and cut the hair on their head between your hands in such a manner that it doesn't move or shift; afterwards, put moist cotton, akin to an egg's lining or garlic juice, on their eye; next, heat up the cautery which is divided: and while above the head, shape it as you would with a goose feather, assembling it so that the cautery sits there; if you see it, let it be pointed from one end of the head to the other, and if you see it, allow it to resemble a tent; but in any case, whatever is above serves well for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it has been opened, and treat its putrefaction and dryness; and if it is closed, operate on it, and remove from under the bow. Afterwards place the cautery in a suitable form, hold your hand near the cautery to the part of the nose above the eye, so that your hands do not cause mischief; and put the cautery into the grease of the oil, causing contamination.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then redo the cautery one more time, and if you need to, let it rest for three days; afterwards place wet cotton on butter, and apply the ointment cure until it heals, as long as it is still moist. And when forty days pass without it healing, apply a corrosive mustard medicine until the bone is uncovered; and follow this prescription according to what your chapter instructs.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the old ones mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand what a fistula is, and do as it dictates; after this, place inside the cut the delicate incision from cowhide that has this shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And it's made in the amount of three parts of lead; and hold your hand or camel firmly, and don't let the patient move, so that the melted lead doesn't flow out of its place; then, when you apply this to the patient's eye, use wet cotton soaked with hen's egg or oil: the lead works on the fistula, causing marvellous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed through the cautery as we have said, it's good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, it is necessary to administer pertussis to the child, and bring the fistula back into the body according to what should be done in its own right.
des crevaices en levres	Of lip sores
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Lips often have sores that are called "whiskers," and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these sores with what we have advised about divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat the tip of a small surgical knife according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place them promptly into these openings until they grow just as far; after that, cleanse the area of wax while it is still healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the boil on the neck
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the boil or in the womb, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it turns rotten and inflames and gets hardened, becoming a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it doesn't improve: then you must have one cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, make an incision at the base of the fistula, and keep your hand until the metal rod reaches the bottom of it, and further into it; and do this once or twice, after treating as we said in treatments, while it is still healthy. And if you treat it like that, it's good; and if not, you must expose the area and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in your manual.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines, when that doesn't work, then put the head of the tooth into your healthy position; afterwards heat up the cautery according to which you will do this in this manner: place a stick under the tooth; and place within the cautery quickly burning embers, hold your hand as long as the patient feels the warmth coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and continue with the cautery according to your wish; afterwards fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and let it sit for an hour before rinsing it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner, the tooth that was moving is now stabilized, and the soft gums are restrained, and the moisture has been corrupted and dried.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes due to coldness, or there is coldness in the mouth and throat, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it must be done according to two methods: and wax cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Wax cautery if it's like this that you take cow butter and put in a spoon made of iron or copper; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, and make the butter into a lump, then place this on the painful tooth quickly and hold until it cools down; do this often until the power reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see damp cotton and cotton in cool butter, put this again on the aching tooth, and place red hot iron on for as long as the fire reaches the tooth pain.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Assemble the fire cautery as you desire, with either a hot iron or an ember, making sure that the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, it will take this form afterwards, and place it on the tooth while keeping your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, because the pain will be alleviated by the end of the day or the following day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter in anticipation of this cautery, and then apply it forcefully; this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the fire cautery according to how much you want and according to your ability; and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are of water and cold moisture, and do not obey to digestion by medicines, then heat up the cautery as described below which forms a shape afterwards, and have two openings for fumes to exit from the other side; place the heated cautery on the abscess once or twice until it reaches the bottom of the abscess. And if the abscess is small, position the cautery according to the size of the abscess and leave it like this for three days; then cover with moistened cotton dipped in butter until the pus has been removed. After that, cure with ointments and wrappings until the wound is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture invades the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the body be cleansed with diuretic medicines first; after that, apply the cautery at the root of the throat, and make sure not to go all the way up to the throat, but only slightly.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After this I made another cauterization at the joint under the neck, close to the spine's head. And let there be a cautery named 'clavicle', which we shall depict in front; and treat the area as previously described until it is sound.
de la toust	Of the cautery by fire, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their root, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the diseases of the prostate are caused by cold moisture, and patients do not have fever or dryness, and it is an old disease, then apply two cauterizations to their force in their veins; and another cautery near the buttocks between the breasts; and let the cauterizations that are called 'clavile' according to the shape mentioned previously.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, do cauterization by pressing with the entire 'point' cautery that is called 'point', which has this form depicted in the ear illness previously. Let there be points up to XXX, or until further notice.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the area according to what was previously described, and make the cauterizations at three points in accordance with this shape:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because of this they use lighter cauteries, as you make three for each person.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the shoulder bone is reset due to moisture, and then it's put back in its place but can't stay there, it repeatedly dislocates with slight movements, just as we have experienced; therefore, you should first reposition the dislocated joint.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, bandage the wounds on his back and sides; after that, lift out the kidney which is inside the testicles with your left hand; and if the joint has been dislocated internally, heat the cautery to a point where it can be used as described:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And burn the thigh until it is pierced to the bone, and let the mark of the burning come together in one. The four marks; and this is done by using a fire cauterizing tool with three needles, because the patterns of the burning are made up of four marks; and they follow the intricacy of a tent and that is the shape of the cauterizing tool with three needles:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And once set on this one nerve, because there are seven marks on it.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the cauterizer, press with force; after that, allow the patient to rest, and do not let their limbs remain in one position for too long until they are well settled.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, such that little happens, then do cauterization on the thickness of the 'clavicle' cautery, or do a few cauterizations by pressing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture has been removed, and the patient's body has healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	For when colds and wetness affect the stomach as long as they are in harmony with its constitution, and increase his urinary discharges, and employ accustomed cure methods but do not benefit him, then it is necessary that his body be covered on his back, and stretch out his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this, perform three fire cauterizations around the heel on each side for a quantity as large as two, with every cauterization reaching to the elbow, and apply two cauterizations under the second ribs until the pattern of the cauterizations forms at three angles, ensuring there is enough space between them so that when they develop into ulcers, they won't join together; and have the cauterizations done precisely so that they cleanse both sides of the heel, and arrange the pattern of the cauterizations according to this form without adjustment.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see it being cauterized with a large cautery in the belly according to this form; and the one who fears this cautery, cauterize by pressing and ruling on the belly here. Mark out based on the amount of flesh that you see should be burned; then cauterize across the entire area of the cautery which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the process of treatment that we have undergone beforehand, as long as it remains clean.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When it comes to the liver causing pain due to coldness, moisture, and heavy winds, until its natural color is restored through overabundance; and if there are any remedies that we have mentioned under divisions for treatment, they do not benefit them. It should then be treated by restricting food on their diet; and signs of three burnings according to this form, figure, and quantity on the liver, away from the hips, at the point where bile flows out; and leave a space between each burning equivalent to two paws; and the burns should extend both longitudinally and circumferentially, and do not press your hand down completely onto the burns. Only half of the area needs to be burned, and make sure that the liver is properly positioned on its sides; and if it cannot tolerate this, they can lie down, extend their legs, and raise their arms; and this is how it should look:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish to do so, apply the fire cautery using a knife, be skilled and careful in your artistry, and watch that you don't burn all of the area, for this would dry out the whole body; and let it only reach boiling point, for there is great subtlety in these areas, and know how to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has spread to the liver, and you know whether it's within the liver tissue or on the outside: if it is within the tissue, the patient feels pain but not excessively so; and if it is on the outside, they feel intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment often causes irritation, it is necessary that the patient be prepared on their head; and then guide the hand towards the area where the infection exists, and then heat the cautery as if it were a rod of iron, according to which shape follows.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And apply the cautery until the ears are charred, and proceed up to the neck, until the ulcer is entirely out; after this, treat according to the treatment of boils when it's healthy; and one should not use this cautery in places other than where a well-studied person in the art of medicine uses them, and by whose hands these diseases have never been treated before.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can confidently operate, and all the while I believe it's better to leave it to him.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Apply a weeping cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old ones said that one should do weeping cauteries using the roots of aristologe, and in this manner: take a long root of aristologe, the longest you can find, make it dry, and make it as thick and long as your thumb; then soak it in oil, light it on fire, and apply it between your elbow and neck for one cautery. Apply two smaller cauteries somewhat down along the part beneath the chin; apply four cauteries between the fifth and sixth rib, leaning slightly behind. Apply one at the navel, another on the stomach, one between the two shoulders, and two more on the next ribs below the cautery that is between the two shoulders; don't squeeze your hand but apply it openly as you would when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And it was said by some old ones that no man uses the fire cautery around the anus, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and then when the pain leaves, as we have mentioned about the abscess in the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	However, in this section there is fear because now the patient dies, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	From the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of 'the mouse' in those ways that we have mentioned regarding the treatment methods, and if it doesn't help, then they apply three methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	There is a method as follows: You make three or four cauterizations, aligned according to the length of the mouse, following the pattern of the cauterization on the liver that we described earlier; and do not rush your hand over the entire cauterization area. And may the patient remain close to their back. And another cauterization method is: you heat up the cauterization with two prongs like what we showed in the shoulder dislocation; lift the bone which is located under the mouse, where the pain originates from the left side, and the elevations are according to that bone, following the length of the body, and the cauterizations should follow the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After you heat the two wicks until one end of each is pierced from the other side, and then remove the cautery, and thus it will have three holes. And if you notice, completely cauterize with all three burners at once.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the remedy when it has treated decay over a long period, and this validates that you should use another of the remedies previously mentioned.
de ydropisie	Regarding dropsy (edema)
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery is only useful for lead poisoning, except when it comes to the method known as "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the methods that we have described in sections, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to make four cauterizations around the anus, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the intestines, and one at the buttocks under the spine, and one place on the breasts; and let the cauterizations be well close to the spinal notch of the hips.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After that, leave the cautery in place to purify for a long time and don't stop treating the patient after the cautery; and then recovery would speed up and both treatments (the cautery and the other remedies) would work together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly is like the one we have shown before; and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what was illustrated earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the fingers swell in someone who is hypoplastic, and are full of yellow bile, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the first and second knuckle; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too much in the form, thus it would get rid of the yellow bile and perform according to this shape with the cauterization:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After applying two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the heel; and make the cauterizations along the length, one in front of the knee cap and the other behind, halfway down the leg; and let the cauterizations last for a long time without treating them until the bile comes out; after you have treated all the other treatments as we have said.
de la menoison	on memory
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When it comes to the problem of abdominal pain due to cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and retaining virtues in the stomach and intestines are compromised and not functioning properly, they cannot be treated by conventional methods; you notice that the patient is suffering significantly and with considerable strength, so apply one large gastric cautery according to what was discussed previously or the gastric cautery, with the circulating cautery; and four additional cauteries around the mouth of finer material in each spot. Apply one fine clavicle cautery and four more on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see that the moisture is abundant and the patient suffering, then apply a cautery to the knife point, and one cautery on each hand, and two small ones on the stomach near the large intestine. For the treatment benefits when there's good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorroids are or have their foundation, or one or more and are old, they contain large cold and moist putrefied humors. If it is treated as we have said in divisions and does not benefit, then do cauterizations: III over the spine on the back, that which is all beyond the spot where the stomach meets with the small intestine a little by little in triangularizing, and I cauterization just below the navel II inches; and if you think that the stomach has cooled down and the food does not cook, and one sees swelling of the belly, then to the belly perform a large cauterization as was previously said, and another over the liver, and another on the spleen with all the cauterizations being used. Leave the cauterizing for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the inflammation known as 'thelul'
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you apply the hot iron, if it seems to be .i. razed, and then place all of it on fire over this iron; keep your hand there until the heat reaches the beginning of the vein from which the blood comes; do this once or twice, and if there are multiple parts, cauterize each one as we have said; after using beneficial ointments while they are still good; and if you use a large heated iron to treat, it will provide greater assistance.
de plaie mal curee	from improperly treated wounds
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot tolerate surgery or opening a wound, as we will explain in its appropriate section, if such sickness occurs that can only be cured through cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	If no cure comes about, and it worsens with gangrene and infected moisture, if you must test fully with a delicate attempt, and be sure that you know the full extent of the attempt in terms of how much perfection it has.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery until it seems ready, and applying it to the fistula according to how deeply the attempt has entered, and continue the cautery as long as the putrid and infected parts are burned away; one time, or two, or three times, according to your need. And be careful not to burn nerves that are present, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the bladder or the intestine, be aware of these points, and do not perform this outside the body. Do it only in the abdominal cavity. Remember that this is not a minor surgery. After treating the wound until it heals, and if there are pus points and oozing matter for a long time, then you know that the pus point has been completely healed. And if the matter is not solidified, you should know that there is still pus in the body, and the bone at its root is corrupted; do this as one of these we will tell you about in the body.
de la maladie des reins	On the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When stomach pain comes from the kidneys and large windiness affect a woman's body, then it is necessary for you to apply the cautery on both sides of the kidneys and with the wrist cautery as we have previously mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in line, and they would provide more assistance.
de la vessie	From the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and moist due to cold, so that patients retain urine, then instruct for a cautery on the lower part of the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, and one on each side, both right and left. Each cautery should be as long as the width of a finger; and do one in front of the back or two if needed; and let the cauteries be round following the form mentioned beforehand.
de la marris	Regarding the treatment for Marosis
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers (likely referring to menstrual blood) are corrupted with delayed passage; and when they come, there's great pain: then it should be done that three cauterizations be performed inside the vaginal orifice, as we have said or for bladder cautery treatment, and two cauterizations at the back; and let the cauterizations be round, as we have said.
de la hainche	From the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistors descend to the thigh bone, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that one leg is longer than the other when measured together; and you find the joints at their separation points, then it should be that you cauterize the skin on the thigh bone like one fire cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the joint where the bone turns, so that the bone is within the circle; and let the cauterizations be as those from which we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauterizations are not present, make three large olive-shaped cauterizations instead, and let the cauterizations be as perfect as all the others; and treat until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	The pain of the thigh
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain occurs in the buttock area, it is due to cold and moisture. The patient needs treatment for this as we have discussed earlier on division, and if the cure does not work, the disease is old: therefore, you should cleanse the body of large, thick humor with foul-smelling pills or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After you perform the cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two ways: that is to say together with heated medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery has several methods, among which one is like this: you apply three triangular cauterizations according to this shape, and make them of good depth and large, with the space between each cautery being as wide as two fingers, and they should be olive-shaped; no middle cautery is made in the center of the hipbone, because there are four following this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that when cauterizing with the circular cautery as we have mentioned before regarding the dislocation of the buttocks; but do it in such a manner that the circles encompass all the buttock area, and all parts around the knee are burnt.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the method used in sciatica, when pain stays in the hip and doesn't reach up to the thigh or down to the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations there where the disease says the pain holds them back, and one above the ankle four times, on the left side a little bit; and let the surgical blade make these cauterizations, and burn away the thickness of the heel; and if the disease feels that the pain extends up to half way down or close to the knee, then cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four at the cauterization marked 'points'.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if more work is needed, then do so; and if the pain seems to be spreading from the knee towards the thigh, apply cutler's or circular cauterization there, and ensure good care in all your cauterizations that you don't leave any part untouched, burning nerves and major arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and constriction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen several cases where cauterization was done on the ankle up to the knee, and they left them until the leg became completely swollen, and even the feet, which were pierced and corrupted entirely.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach treatment that led to death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are concentrated in two parts together, make a cautery on one part and another, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise man spoke about the cautery of the hipbone, as it is described here, make one such iron and have it at the head also as big as a snail's shell, or somewhat smaller, and have it with joints, and from each joint to another there should be an interval equal to the size of a pea; and let the joints be in two parts, and they should resemble knots, and each one should have a well-made iron boss; this is its form.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it's entirely red and gives off steam, then place it on the sore hipbone, and twist it towards the healthy side; and apply this cautery once for each rod and leave it there for three days; and afterwards, make a bandage of butter, and let the wound be open for as long as necessary; after oil treatment until it heals.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use very little of this type of cautery due to the fear of his patients, and there are few who use it; however, this is a good type of cautery which can be endured, and leaves no marks.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauterizing instruments of medicine consist in making an implement with joints where the edge of the door descends, and it can be made of steel or iron, being long on one side, and at its height there are two knots, each having the size equivalent to a button; they should have a forward edge and above, and they join together according to this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing on the hip bone of the lying patient under his side without any injury to the sound part, and quickly place your hand mostly on the hip bone; afterwards pour between the two circles of the hot awl heated in the flame for a moment, and leave it for an hour. Allow the patient to endure the heat and burn from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there is also burning like that of fire; and when the burnings have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently upwards, and leave it thus for three days. Then apply butter until that which is black from the scalding fades away; and let it be for three more days until putrefaction sets in; and after this would be the last aid following the treatment of ointments as long as he is sound.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, you must make the cautery mark it as far as possible according to what you did at the hip joint; and this is how one uses hot cauteries, and I have written about them concerning the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take quicksilver and powdered sulfur, in equal amounts of each, grind them together, and place the mixture in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Let it have the small thorn that a razor point might be able to enter; and place this mixture in another well-weighed pot, and add quicksilver and sulfur gently on top, until there is twice as much liquid above the powders as you will have taken with your hand; and leave it like this until the essence comes out in oil and dregs or the pot is weighed down. Then take all this essence, and pour it over sulfur and quicksilver just as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And thus it will be very useful and administered in movements of medical work and in other member's cauteries For it performs a work akin to fire, and with other medicines one does well to cauterize the hip such as turpentine and anacardium oil mixed with soap, all these things combined together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment for someone who was cured of hip pain and sciatic nerve pain, and much delight, and says that no other treatment was done, and that they were healed in one go once this treatment was performed, and they bathed as he instructs below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And instructs to do it in this manner that you take fresh and dry litargy (a mineral) powder, and mix it thoroughly with a little fat, then apply it on the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain lies, and bind it. Leave it for three hours until the pain no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make them enter into a bath until their body becomes somewhat aroused, and make them rest on the bed, and the pain will go away completely and they shall be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	Know that no one should use such medical instruments as a cautery, unless after the removal of pus or bodily fluids.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides states that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's urine, it helps a little; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take grease and mix it with old oil, then apply it to the depression that is between the thumb on the foot and the one called the heel bone.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking dried goat urine, apply it to the fire until it becomes ashes and then mix it with grease. Place this mixture on the fabric and let it harden completely before removing it. Repeat this process several times until you think that the treatment should reach up to the hip, and until the pain is alleviated; this type of cautery is called "goat urine cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by impact or from percussion or due to excessive evacuation, or due to any appearance of cold matter spread out, none of these appearances are worth cauterizations, for it is akin to what comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary that after the maladies have been emptied of rotten pills or other appearances, one should be performed on the back, where the pain resides, three lines marked by an incision, and in each line from 5 to more cauterizations according to the strength and quantity the maladies can endure; and let the cauterizations be done as with the cautery called "points"; and if you see fit, perform 3 or 4 cauterizations at the midpoint of the clavile cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often befalls the young children, and at its beginning it is such that they become pale when they stand up, and fear; and you find in the last spinal cord of the back and within us the appearance that comes upon other spinal cords.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and observe its cure, if you apply it with a blood cautery in the form described like this.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the cautery burns each segment of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the spine along the length of the cautery for two or three lines, and make sure the points are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the treatment as long as it remains healthy according to what we have said, and be cautious not to use the cautery in a state of illness near nerve areas.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain in joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain arises from moisture spreading throughout each limb, and when the pain affects the foot, it's referred to as 'gout' properly, and when it's due to cold reasons and can be treated with medicines alone, it should be cured using cauterization in this manner: make a cauterization around the joint of the foot, and let the olive oil cauterizer look like this:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need, you should hold at the foot of the pit, and if it needs to be cauterized all over the area where we claim "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, you should cauterize at each knee with three or four on each part of the oil area; and if you need more, you may do so, but don't let your hand go beyond until the keur's skin is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend as far as the knees and behind, then he should be treated with the cautery that we have described in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, then make cuts between the second and third lines; and if there remains any pain in the arms, then make cuts on each joint and around the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and administer remedies.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if you give him good care and cleanse the pus, he will be cured with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the uterus
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture occurs in anger, and the bowels descend into the crotch which is new, it must be that when you see them being cured, do not let him eat that day; and use things that relax the stomach so that his intestines descend from his belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to shave his pubic hair until the bowels are repaired, then take it with your fingers, and test for any movement over the rupture on the bone under the knife, and at all a sign that is similar to half of a circle above the navel; then heat up the cautery as described here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	Until it is white and discharges scabs.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then remove the pus from its place; and let the attendants cut her hand so it doesn't turn back; and treat his thighs well to the patient, and put a cloth and a bandage on his thighs, and another on his buttocks where he cuts his hands; then apply the cautery to your sign on all your hand, and yours straight until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it on the first try, start again another time until you reach the bone; and watch carefully so that no pus flows when you do the cautery, not to burn him; and let the patient not die or any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach to the bone at the cautery, your procedures are worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it must be that the cauteries of children are subtle according to their size, and those of large people also as big as their measure; after three days, apply a butter ointment on the lesion with the fire cautery until the scab is removed; afterwards apply other remedies until they heal properly, and let the patient lie for forty days under his back so that the wound is well sealed; and it must be that these exercises are exhausted for a long time, so that blisters do not come out when he wants to go into chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to stand up, let him wear a well-made bandage and leave it on for another forty days; and have good rest, let him work lightly and guard against too much drinking and eating, and too much shouting; and when he does this lesson properly, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after this about the treatment of trimming in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Regarding the rupture of the stomach
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And when wounds come to other wombs and are recognizable, and you see that they are not growing anymore, then you should apply the cautery according to its size with each application, and heat it up to one-third of its normal temperature; after this treatment follow what we have said; and none of the old ones said that one must use the cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But the first sign is the indication of the depth and draw a line across the width above the wound, and another below, and move your hand along with the entire length of the cauterizing instrument.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first applications of the cautery are lighter and more reddened.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old age in no limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being hit, and if this pain lasts for a long time, and medicine cure does not work, then it is necessary to apply the cautery known as 'points', and place the cauterizations according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness, and its utility, and its location of torsions and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first application of the cautery is effective, that's good; if this doesn't work, try another cautery on this one. For these treatments require movement in the limb that is closest to them, so you must perform the cauteries as long as the patient feels well.
de meselerie	In mixture
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The wounds are treated once with each application of the cautery using great help. Likewise, the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy is treated in this manner.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can't you see the cautery? Take care that if the disease is at the beginning, and it's cured according to what we have said in the division, and doesn't worsen or remain stagnant, and you doubt whether corruption might spread throughout the entire body. Therefore, make two applications of cautery on the head: the first one starts from behind towards the nose, and the second one goes forwards towards the forehead at the end of the hair; then do it for the other two spots, and leave your hand until the cautery reaches down to the bone, and let enough scabs form so that the vapors of the thick fluids might escape. And cauterize on the cheeks according to what was said before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mixture is spread everywhere and it becomes obvious that it's spreading, you should cauterize using these cauterizing methods we've mentioned: one on the nose, and two cauterizations on the spine at the neck, and seven cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one large on the sternum and another underneath, and two each on the shoulders; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the heels, and one for each joint in hands and feet, and on the creases of the palms; and be careful not to burn any nerves under the heel, do not cauterize anywhere on the bone of the fingers, and one on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more I use the cautery, the more assistance I provide, and it becomes beneficial; and know that patients do not feel pain from the cautery as healthy people do, because their bodies are already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it should be that the cauterization is large and small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in the ways of metal tools.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, wash the wound with flour mixed with honey and other treatments until it heals properly.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but remains diseased, then you should perform cauterizations on the limb according to the size of the limb; and make the cauterizations a little inside the skin at the point of infection; then treat it with remedies until it heals.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And always make the cautery and on the hand and foot and back, at the release of the nerve that makes the limb move, and thus it is extracted; and all the while none should interfere with it if there are no knowledgeable persons regarding limbs and the outputs of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	From burns
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease known as "albaras" is matured, and medicine does not help at all, then use a cautery to treat it slightly for some time, according to the amount of blood in the wound, until the pus is removed and its color changes; then cleanse with flour mixed with lentils and rose oil, and leaves from the plantain plant, as well as chicken blood and quail urine, each using one part of these ingredients. Mix them all together, wrap it with a cloth, and leave it on the wound until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment for the sore by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When gangrene begins and you see it start, if you catch it in the early stages, apply a cautery to the point that seems like a circle around the gangrenous area.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And always, some wise individuals advise that you apply the cautery also in the center of the gangrenous area; and I do not think this is a good idea either, because I fear it might lead to erosion and decay, which has already been my experience on several occasions; and more importantly, it's better to cauterize around, using the 'circular' cautery as we've mentioned before when talking about other types of cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the swelling which cannot perish
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an illness that's called "adubelati", and it slowly progresses to death or due to the excess it causes or because of old age when they are too aged (that means far too old) and there is little blood, or due to tension; and you see it hastening towards death: then cauterize internally with small cauteries intermittently; after that leave them like this.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see that it is pierced all through the cautery, then heat up the cautery as described here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this illness that is called "adubelati" until the cauterization has reached the belly and be such cauterizations that the patient feels it spreading outwards in such a way that the course of decay is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure until it has been completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment with fire using a hot iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another form of disease is called 'corrodens', and it's nothing else but a member infection, as it rots the members just like dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can endure the cautery of fire, then prepare the fire cauteries to be small and large, according to what suits the location or where the disease is; after applying the cautery from all sides until you eradicate all the corruption, and leave nothing behind, ensuring that everything which has been corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And leave it for three days, and apply the oil with a burn on the treated areas until the scabs from the fire are healed, and all the corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of ointments that produce pus.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days you see that the wound is healing properly, it's good; and if not, then reapply the cautery to the remaining part starting from the corrupted parts.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this method was once treated with an astringent instead of the fire cautery; but still, the fire cautery is more effective. I have already mentioned the treatment of the astringent in the section: take it whenever needed.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	The text "des porrelz qui vienent as piez" translates to "the stones that come towards the bones" in English. This seems to describe a medical issue related to stones or deposits moving towards bone structures, which could be a description of gallstones, kidney stones, or other similar conditions in medieval medical terminology.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Sometimes, when a wound opens up and produces a disease which is called "constriction" according to our understanding, it results in a large bulging thing that causes pain on the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the treatments for this disease do so according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This means understanding fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	The fire cautery requires you to heat until it glows like a goose feather and should be made of good iron at the size that allows piercing from every side. Make sure there are fine margins. Once heated fully on the nail, twist your hand around the nail immediately as soon as it touches the tip; leave him in this position for three days until it begins to fester; then apply an ointment of crushed wild vinegar mixed with oil over night and leave this ointment for the whole duration. The nail will come out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cleanse it with a greasy ointment until the wound is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted through the belly and many times occur in hands and in feet, it is necessary for you to bring in hot cautery of water; and be as follows: take one of an arable stick or iron, or a goose feather, and place on the nail and its root. This refers to removing warts. Place the stick so that it burns completely around, then put a bit of hot water, and keep your hand well fixed, pressing your hand as you twist the stick until the margin of the stick reaches to the root of the nail; then find the deep passage of hot water until it touches the root; and let the patient endure the slight burning from hot water for an hour; then leave him like this, and all roots will be uprooted completely.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	So treat one after another, until you have treated all those within the body, then heal of inflammations that generate pus.
li cure dou trembler	The treatment involves shaking.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When there are trembles due to cold or nerves, or fever of the fourteenth day or other similar conditions, it is necessary that you perform 4 or 5 cauteries on each of the spine points of the back. One cautery between each spinal point; and one on the chest under the olive cautery; if this continues, hasten the patient's recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	pus-filled sores
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No appearance from behind the surface of the body, or pus-filled boils, that come from large decayed materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	When they become visible from the boil's surface that come from large decayed materials, it is necessary at first when they appear to apply a fine fire cauterizer: a willow stick's tip with its point seized in fire, or from a long root of rhubarb, or using a lentil-shaped cauterizer.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And each time they are cauterized in the beginning when they become visible following this manner, and they cannot grow pus forwards but it removes the excess from which they come, and they are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times great hemorrhages of the artery occur from where it is cut in the wound that reaches to the opposite side, or at incision of the abscess, or with the cautery on the limb, and similar situations; and it is a very grievous thing to occlude.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet, when this happens to any person, if you quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein and hold it firmly until the pulse becomes quiet under your finger, and no more drops escape; then heat several olive oil cauteries of various sizes until they are all red. Then take one, or a larger or smaller according to the size of the wound and the location where the artery is located, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your index finger, and keep the cautery there until the pulse becomes still again.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are off the fire, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are on the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And never stop doing this one after the other until the bone is fully healed; and be careful not to burn the nerve that's nearby, and that no harm comes upon the patient; and know that when there is a break in an artery, it can't be mended very well by itself when the artery is large, unless done through one of the four ways we've mentioned: by cautery, or extraction if not already treated, or with strong stringing, or with medicines placed which have power to mend blood; and then tie and hold in place.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will provide for the mending by tightly binding with cloths or by putting heat sources on, or other similar things, if they do not benefit unless so prescribed.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they have no medicine or remedy at hand, should apply their finger on the wound site as we said before, and spread it well until the wound and the vein are mended upon it; and do not move his hand but keep it moist with cold water often till it becomes very cold until the bone is frozen, swollen, and mended. And perform cautery and medicine preparations for what needs them.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of treatments for surgery
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have explained in the first chapter all diseases where it is necessary to use a fire cautery or hot medicine, and we discussed their causes, instruments, and forms. I put that chapter up until the foot, and I will proceed through this chapter using the same path as what seems easier for those who want it.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And as I begin this one, you should know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first about the cauteries, so it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you not to undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	And few people come for treatment in any way.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who despair so much with their illness that they die lightly due to the madness they find in their disease, and the severity of their wickedness; one must have fear from these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who give their meaning and say: "Wait, I am sick"; and the illness is troublesome.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not right that you consent to those who come to you in this manner, but place more care on your honor than on your greed, and do not rashly but wisely follow those whom you are certain of, and can take advice from; use prediction and indication in the treatment of your patients for whose welfare it is meant; and this will help you acquire good reputation, glory, and lasting memory. And this will assist you to attain a noble reputation, glory, and enduring memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, Our Lords give us good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have arranged this chapter in devising by chapters, according to what is before or the chapter on cauteries, which I have devised from head to feet, because you will find it more easily of that which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	at the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease comes very often to children at birth, and when the mother constrains the head of the child too tightly; and sometimes it occurs due to a response reason that one does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than children, and among all those I have observed, their death hastened; for which reason it seems to me that it would be better to divide the work of this chapter into these cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child of this, the shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day so much that it could no longer bear it; and believed to such moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled under the bone near the elbow, between the chest and the bone; and the muscles are like these when moisture is between the chest and the bone, and abscesses are small, that you cut in the middle of the head a wide crack; and let it be so long as two fists, as long as the moisture flows; and see this form of the syphilitic:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in a manner like an X, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see that the edges of the head are opened from each part, and the water spurts out when you press it from your hand inside, and this is not relieved: then you must make three cuts in the middle of the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after making the incision, remove all moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After holding the suture cuts and powder openings, and applying wine and oil, leave them like this until the fifth day; then remove the stitches, treating the wound with dressings and ointments, and allow the head to heal equally. Finally, have the patient eat dried meat from a source with little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of making an incision is that you look at where the opening of the abscess is, and place the hot iron; for it is never in front; it's never behind; not to the right; nor to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore, make the cut where the abscess opens, and place the hot iron, and perform the incision according to what you are able; and be careful not to damage an artery; watch for a flow of blood, so that the patient dies due to bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	On cautery of fire commands the diseased person to let their hair grow long and even; and if they poke at their origin, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to anyone that a disease is called "catarrh" with the eyes or at the bottom, and this disease is old, and the medicine treatment does not help, then the last resort procedure should be the cautery, using which one would cut off the two major arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, once the patient can see properly; after rubbing their eyes with a harsh cloth until the arteries are visible, then extract the eye from all of the socket; then check where the veins lie and ensure that both sides are equal to each other and behind the ears, and they have started to heal; then mark the sides with an iron tool, rub them with a sharp cutlass blade for two parts, until the edges reach the bone, and this must be done so as not to damage the surrounding tissue.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, pinch the pus near the artery and the vein above, cutting also as one inch through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow out continuously from high up.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open upon feeling it, you should measure the size of the space in three fingers. Then press and go until you reach the bone; and that which needs to be expelled from the blood is six c/, and by chance a little more or less according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains up against the bone precisely like syphilis, if there are no signs suggesting an abscess beneath, then tighten the wound, bandage it, and apply ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	In the treatment of a fire cautery, instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and evenly; if they prick at their base, hold them still so they do not move until they fully grow.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	As the old age comes with and experiences acute inflammation and congestion, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and lower back areas from past illnesses and similar issues; medicine treatment for these is done through methods of medical cure techniques. Yet, none of these treatments are effective, so we remove the arteries in the temples and apply fire cautery, as we have detailed.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method for extracting them is such that the patient feels behind their temples, and listens to the artery which opens up at the temple, as it opens well through its pulsation, and responds only in some people who are too cold; if it does respond, then cool the neck of certain cloths, then rub it with a rough cloth, and raise the head under hot water until the artery appears clearly. Then take the sponge that is shaped like this:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly strip the skin until you feel the artery, then lift it up with forceps and remove well the layers which are from each part; and if the artery is thin, if you twist it at the tip of the nail, then cut that part according to the size of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it isn't sewn, neither will escape without all pain everywhere.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And remove the blood from two to three; and if the artery is large, it should be tied with two threads of a strong silk thread, so that corruption does not occur in front of the healing of the wound, nor in subsequent bleeding; then cut off the excess between the two threads at this moment. And if you see, then apply the cautery gently until you reach the bone as long as the joints are cut; and this is the completed work, if the patient doesn't have fever and has warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	And the cauterization helps to finish off infections: because it provides more assistance against infections.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	In order for the removal of arteries, fill the area with old cotton and place it on well-made gauze; when you separate them, apply dry medicines that produce heat and gauze until they are clean; and should you cut into the artery as you work, quickly use a cautery or fill the area with vitriol and press your hand against it so that the wound is sealed; and if you do not have this present, place ice on the area instead until the wound is frozen, then rinse with cold water while keeping the wound from moving; and treat it as necessary. The one who moves faster during artery extraction when using a cautery should cauterize the blood vessel by cutting it in half across, but ensure that the cuts are deep enough to retain more of its heat for longer periods.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they retain less of their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And must have a gap of one large finger between the two knives, and then when you prepare to apply them both at once, and place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, and cut the blood vessel in two; and keep them apart from each other with the shoulder joints because there is no welding effect throughout this cautery technique; and this is how a cautery should be formed:
des larmes	Of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are flowing from veins above the testicle of the head of strength, and no medical remedy benefits, and you see the reddening action of the patient, and feel or front pulsation as if gasping; and at places they are tenacious and moist such that the hair of papers falls, and the papers heat up, and burn from the intensity of the tears, then it requires this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called the old "wound healer", and if you treat the person with this illness, make the hairs grow where he has hair or on his forehead, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to its length; and let one cut be as two doves along the whole forehead in such a way that it goes forward until it touches at the nose tip, and the other ones are each two doves above each rib under the skin. And avoid cutting the arteries which are above each rib under the skin; keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound have the size of three doves across; and prepare a piece of sponge and some cloths for wiping off blood, then use the sharp spatula blade formed out of two parts to cut.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is made below the temple up to the second incision; and burn all the kerf that is between the two gaps throughout the entire sinus located above the bone. Then cut further along from the middle incision up to the other second, and then remove this pus-filled space.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If there is a tool placed in the first gap which is called 'cultellaire', and it has very sharp edges on one side, but not so on the other, it forms this:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And make the cut towards the soft flesh at the knee, and the cut go towards the bone at the leg, and the blade until it feel in the middle crack.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make cuts to all veins that descend from the head as needles until the incision is continuous up to the one that opens at the knee, and then do the same thing in the middle cut until the other opening; and then drain equal blood, express the leg for the blood taken; then put in each crack a tent of old cotton, and place on wet cloths with vinegar and oil and aspen bark, and ensure that abscesses don't appear; and on the third day untie the bandage, and give large doses of water tea, then apply a cure of ointment basil with olive oil, and other cures used for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When there is a sudden onset of thick expectoration and you see the eyes withered and small, and weakening of vision, and burnt paper; and the hair falls out, and one sweats in fullness from fever, and the patient shivers, and the body is racked by fevers. Then know through these incidents that those substances and this mucus come from many veins, and the wet treatment applied, if it is correct, then this is how it should be.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And indeed, you instruct the patient behind their forehead, then make a great incision through the forehead, and another quite wide just below it.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the temple on the left to the temple on the right along this incision until you reach the bone; and move your hand away from the temple nerves that move during eating. And when the bone is uncovered, let all the blood drain out with a sponge and then cleanse between the two lips of the incision before placing old cotton and linen material. Then cover it with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, and keep yourself free from pus; when it's removed, it's necessary that you rub the bone until the cartilage begins to grow, then clean it with drying substances, which make harden cartilage.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of the wheat flower and four parts of comfrey, and make them into a paste; and apply it to these wounds to promote the healing of flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	On the cauterization of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that passes through the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or mine stones or similar things like iron; or seeds such as beans, peas; or any flowing thing like water and air and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it bleeds in the ear hole or any other manner of thing that doesn't fit with the ear or does not grow in the ear, place the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if there is no purple or sooty oil distillation, then proceed with extraction; and you make them sneeze with consideration, and block their noses when sneezing comes, and insert pieces of cloth or wool into the ear; and keep the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times bleeding comes through this treatment; and if it does not bleed, then proceed with the extraction using fine needles, which is described like this:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps by force like pins, that's good; if not, proceed with the extraction using a fine needle of slight curvature; and if it doesn't jump through this, make an araneus (a type of tool used in surgery) and take hold of the head of the tool or the ear pinna firmly, and stick it into the waxed part of the tool until the wick cannot enter with the tool; then apply force with your hand as we have stated many times; and if force does not come out in this manner, grasp the tool at one end and take hold of its handle, place an instrument suitable for that task on either side, and insert a little cotton. Then press the wax firmly onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull with force.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not jump through all these things that we have said, then hurry to pierce the ear as though an abscess would burst from wax, and convulse. And the method of piercing is such that you first make a surgeon's incision in the tympanic membrane and drain blood according to its extent, then place the surgeon's hand between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and create a small incision at the base of the ear where the fat hangs down; and let the incision be as round as the moon until you reach the bone, then operate according to your ability, and suck it out quickly into your mouth; and treat with care when it is clean.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's granules that are inside and they are swelling, proceed with extraction; and if they cannot come out, proceed as follows:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not perform this when you think that the grains are moist due to the moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then remove them with fine needles and suction, just as we said, so that the extractions go well.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water, therefore, that is in the ear, then the patient should practice shallow coughing and generously fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be standing over that same ear or where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps up to heaven, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it doesn't reach heaven, then take several stones according to the length of your thumb, and make them light. Warm each stone slightly on fire; and place one or two of these stones in the patient's ear, and let them jump off from their foot on another side, and have another stone jump over the stone that is in the ear; and keep repeating this with the stones one by one until all the water comes out completely, and thus jumps out completely; and if you see it jumping completely, then take a rush, and insert one of these stones into the ear, and the other end on fire until the harder end of the rush is burnt; then redo the rest of the rushes until all the water has come out, just as we have described with respect to the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the beast, if it is small in size, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, perform the extraction with forceps; and this is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from ears, when you treat it as we have said in division and dealing with distillations, if the treatment does not benefit, you must observe the ear to sunlight: if there is no worm opening, if you extract them using fine probes; and if nothing appears, take the form of this:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And apply the finest oil in the ear according to the amount of suffering it causes, then spread it throughout the ear canal; do this often until all the drops have been used.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, stuff the cotton in the ear canal as I have instructed for in the treatment of stones; and if they do not protrude as we have said, administer distillations that our ancestors have proven effective in the extraction of worms, and you will find instructions on this among the distillation treatments; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this tool according to this form which I show you:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And make it of silver or an earthworm with two small holes at one end and a wide opening for distillation; and to press the essence within during distillation use one well-made araigne's tool fit for this purpose. If you see a rasp and wrap tightly around the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the swab, and place that swab inside the ear; then stuff all the cotton into the rasp, press your hand gently until the oil is fully distilled or until the ear is filled; and sense the disease internally, and let the essence boil for a while when distilling it inside the ear; and make sure it isn't too cold because the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	On the cauterization of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens to those who have ear injuries or dead bodies inside the ear. Such injuries occur none of them within the ear if it cannot be seen; and they do not appear twice to expel the perforation, yet one can see well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And that which comes from within but cannot be seen is due to infection in various dispositions. And according to what you see, it is necessary for you to place the ear under the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent opilation, if the work has produced this pus of which I speak:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And cut and scrape all around front and back so it doesn't hurt the ear; if there's a thickening due to dead tissue or a bump on the ear, use sharp tweezers and gently pinch, until all the hard parts are removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the waxes are completely inside the ear, take a fine, light tool and heat it slightly on fire, then place it near the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you sense the inflammation that makes the ears of the patient painful to hear, gently pierce them and ensure you do not damage the nerves of the ear; then place a tent in the ear according to its width around the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Continue to do this every day until the wound heals, or take a bandage and dampen it with rose water, then add powdered vitriol. And if you notice swelling in the ear, it is necessary that you change the bandage and use another one soaked in a wick made of rose oil and wax, until all the swelling has been removed; then treat it until it becomes healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, dip an sponge and soak it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which include remedies used for distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the wax of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	When the hairs come out on the papers when they are wet and then dry, it is necessary that you spread them with forceps and prongs, and cut from its roots with a spit bowl; then place under the sulfur crucible.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if you don't peel them, cauterize with a small lens cautery, and after the incision, let it burn; and many times they are repaired, so that nothing remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times papers come with things that seem to pulse in their shape and hardness, and due to this, there is an illness called "granule", and it's a collection of hard fluid in the paper from above and below; the operations are like this: take care if the granules move on one side and the other, and this is a simple matter to understand; then make them wide first, then shave each part slightly, then pinch them, and chop.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you can't cover it without piercing a bit of the paper, as long as it doesn't harm the patient; and if there's a large tear, stitch it up with one seam, and treat until it heals; and if it's small, don't apply too much force, because the ointment will heal it quickly and stimulate tissue growth.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the granulation descends within the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and cut out the granulation with one or more pinches from both sides; and should the paper be moved away by the incision, it doesn't cause any pain. And when the granulation is cut, remove the salty water, and treat the area until the patient's tissues heal.
de la graisse des eulz	From the grease of the ulcers
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that saturates the sheets of papers above, and this happens more with children than adults, and it doesn't harm their eyes much, and they come to have weeping in the mornings, and can't look at the sunlight because tears rush into their eyes; and for this reason, they lie down by their stools always, and sleep there, and their papers become moist under their eyebrows due to the Exinach that opens up in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the arm with your fingers and feel the discharge between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way to do this is that the patient places their head into your healthy place. Then take one linen cloth, and set up a tent in such manner as a circle according to the quantity that contains extraction from each part; then put it on it; press with your fingers from both sides, so that the extraction is gathered within the circle; then cut in the middle of the moisture using a sharp blade for a crack of some size, and not bigger than the wound one makes when opening veins; and let the leather fit all around until you see the extraction through it. And in various positions, extraction comes out from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract it then into one piece of linen cloth between your fingers at the front, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered; and make sure you don't stick in the slit, that you don't come up to the whole blade up to the eye, that you do not hurt it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the incision does not open at the start of the cut, increase the cut slightly gently until it opens; then pull it as we have said, then moisten with cloths and water, place on the wound, and stretch with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such cases where they crush grain and put it up to corrupt the moisture that has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then he should be treated as long as he is sane.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the arm's abscess, so the treatment with plasters soothing should continue as long as he is sane.
des poilz des papieres	"Des poilz des papieres" translates to "Paper hair" in English. However, this phrase doesn't seem to make much sense contextually and could potentially be a typo or an error in the translation. If it's referring to paper made from hair, then it might mean something like "hair-based paper". The precise meaning would depend on the broader context of its use within the text.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hair grows out of place other than its natural position and ages, they harm the eyes and bring on ailments such as familiar infections and degenerations of paper-like tissues, as well as albugine disease, all because these causes lead to destruction of the eyes; and one must cure according to four methods: or with a fire cautery combined, or by using medicine in accordance with what is stated before or concerning the chapter on cautery, and this can be done either through incision and suturing or by ligation, depending upon which I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary for you to place the eye's main part in its health. Then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it turns, that is good. If not, then insert one needle through both layers at once. And do this either inside or outside the paper edge where hair grows from these hairs. Then pull two threads upwards across all the paper and turn them on a seam. Then cut along part under the paper, under those hairs in place, from the large tear up to the small; then remove one thread, and insert between the paper a little cotton tent, and on top of the paper make a figure like an asterisk, as if it were the leaf of a myrtle tree. And be sure that the figure matches the size of the area you lift where the paper is folded down to all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there's a part that requires the use of large quantities of paper according to whether the paper is softened; then do all in one of the two sections marked by your signet, and begin with the largest plaster until it becomes small. And have one of the cuts close to the natural hair line in the growth of an inch, then place a quarter of an inch inside one of the two corners near the knee, then peel it off entirely; then join the two edges together using a needle with a single strand of fine wool on all sides, and clean out any blood, then let the excess threads dry on both sides of the stitches where there are sticky substances if you see fit; and if this is not done, do not worry about it, then leave the stitch and the threads for three to four days. Then treat the wound without a stitch with drying and binding things because the paper heals due to the healing of the wound and its joining together, but the stitch is rotten (as the old say), and this is work without fear; and there's another way: you should sign the paper in a shape that looks like the leaf of myrtle as we have described it on three quarters according to the form given here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut those that are at the top equally according to this shape:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the thing isn't equal, take a needle or thread with it, and place the thread in your mouth; and hold the other thread at the large artery, and the second thread at the small, then evenly join the threads between your thumbs; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above where you have indicated, as we have told, then suture the two edges of the wound together, and heal it as long as it is healthy; and if pus comes to your incision, treat it with cerate and soothing ointments; and no time should pass when the hair from the paper turns yellow: in which case you must use what we have told about incisions; but the stitches on one or both are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of canes follows this form: and it is that you should convert the paper and cut inside according to what I have said, then create two stitches by art, and also two fine threads as long as the paper width is; and take two parts of the thread; then assemble each one delicately on top of the paper's oil opening, and tighten the two cane stitches from both parts in a formed manner; and leave it like this for some days, and the skin that has been tightened will shrink and heal until it flows out by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, and the cut has strength, then heal it as long as it is healthy. And when the wound is stitched up, and the paper lifted, and no more hair will fall; this is the form of the two threads that you will do according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The procedures are as follows: you need to take a delicate needle, and attach two strands of fine silk thread to it; then align the joints and tie them precisely together with these threads, making sure they're about the length of one hand in total; next, weave another short piece of fine silk thread through this process briefly, and secure each end of the joint. Then place the sickens' joint at your healthy position; ensure that sunlight can reach it because this procedure involves intricate details and precision, then insert the needle into the root area where the hair is attached until you pierce paper as you pull upwards from the natural hair; next, extract enough hair up to the insertion point of the thread, and secure each strand in place if there are two or more strands. Finally, withdraw your hand so that all hairs protrude evenly from the sheet along with their natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the process of extraction is done and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the thread from underneath all the way to the end that you have ordered, until the extraction point goes beyond the part you can see with your eye; then once you remove the thread and the hair, let the wound heal for two or three days. And if the hair is small, accompany one long horsehair along its natural length, and raise it together with that or leave it as it was, until it becomes long again and then raise it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Regarding eye infections
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this illness, called 'aleacrati' or the corruption coming into the eye, if it occurs in two ways: one naturally, and the other unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And happens suddenly from wounds, or by the action of surgeons or cauterization, and through similar actions.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of performing surgery on it is that you break this bond, and open up its lips, and place linen cloths inside, and keep it like this until it heals; and it should not be used in treating it with things that dry out and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	But if you do this, the illness will come back worse than before; however, use things that soften it, such as fennel; and apply water or decoction of linseed, and linseed oil in a poultice, and treat with these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment are that you must be cautious not to seal it according to its original form; and these operations that we have mentioned do not leave out remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	from the matter that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is truly called 'axacrati', and it's natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidents arise from wounds and cracks and cauterization and similar things; as for the procedure of this chapter, you take a needle with two threads in it, stick it into the flesh, make two piercings on the left side starting at the right corner so that the thread runs through two parts of the flesh; then push the flesh above all the way to the tip of the needle and the clamp onto the large opening.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper comes back as it should, that's good; if not, take a blade and place it in the crack, then turn the paper and make two cuts inside the paper. And let there be two shoulders at the edges of the incision you made, and create angles such that when they are assembled together, the shape resembles the shape of a letter which has no 'I griesche'; then remove this flesh according to how its edges are shaped and in this case, from the one who was in charge of the paper. Then join up the two necessary parts with thread; then do the treatment that we have mentioned for softening medicines, and purges, until it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a wound or stitches or cautery, it is necessary that you cut a full opening across the hairs of the papers, and in accordance with what was said before; then cut between the two halves of a tent, as I have said; and must do the work according to the shape of the disease, for she varies greatly in form, and the surgeons prepare tools everywhere so they know how to bring the figure back to its natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what is appropriate for action and instruments in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	quickly from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this stitch occurs using the hands in such a way that the paper is fastened with the white of the oil, and it cannot move or do its natural tasks, then you must therefore take the tip of a razor under the paper, and lift it upwards; and set it at the pinholes, as long as you manage to reach the fine wisp of wax that is not too hard nor too sharp, so that the patient does not suffer from the wax being too hard and causing irritation in the eye; and make your incision, which you scrape the gathered together part slightly, so that the paper regrows according to its natural shape; and heal all that assembled together, and do no sharp cut within the eye, but instead lift it with fresh water and vinegar; then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put damp wool on the eye. And after three days use a colander and other tools continuously until it is healed completely.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the eyelash of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the eyelash has two ways: it is nervous and resembles a single hard thread, and another which isn't nervous but resembles white moisture that is frozen. When you touch it with iron and treat it around like needles, you cannot; both similarities start near the large tear ducts, grow little by little until they cover all vision, light, and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of incision is such that when you treat the patient with their healthy head, then release their eyes; lift the eyelash using your hand, then pull out the nail with small double-folded scissors, and place it above; take a needle, and attach one horse hair or cow hair or ox hair, along with a strong thread; double the needle's tip slightly and insert it into the nail, piercing it completely through. Then bind the nail to the thread and place it above; burn the entire length of each hair on both sides of the nail that lies under the eyelid membrane and the silk-like hair until the root, then cut off any remaining at the root beneath the tear ducts while preserving fine tissue and using gentle force, leaving the natural tears unaffected by the incision process. Then, when the nail has been removed to just its base and thread, as we have said; burn away all excess hair from this area as shown:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And see to it that the cautery doesn't touch the fatty skin and damage it, and that the needle doesn't pierce; and after incision pour a bit of powdered sulfur into the wound, and create a collar with mercury paste, and leave it until another day; then treat as necessary for as long as the person is well.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail isn't nerve-filled and you can't push in the needle, and the small nails cannot enter it, this is often treated by applying medicines to resemble a nail; and proceed as I have described in division, and if you see it become swollen, treat with an ointment that the patient might apply lightly pointy according to this shape.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Remove the nail carefully upwards, and if you see that it is thinning slightly and its base has compressed, then apply a collar made from mercury paste and a red collar with powdered sulfur to the eye, and keep this in place until another day; then proceed with the next operation according to this same process until all of the nail is removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing goes against your sight, like an abscess on the eye, then proceed, and first clean the abscess as long as it is healthy. Then restart the operation as described previously, until it's healthy again.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if there's the appearance of the eye tissue damaged by considerable harm, then suspend treatment with the onion, and apply only part of it not all at once, making sure tears don't come in contact; then instill red collyrium made from litharge into the eye.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some individuals are born without red hair, and it covers the eye and is held above the eyelids and eyebrows, appearing like a rose made of charcoal; and the eyes remain such that the patient experiences great pain and injury. The treatment involves setting the chief to its healthy position then moving the eyes, and doing this until the entire mass of flesh conforms to that size, maintaining support with force; then remove the first layer of flesh, shave it completely down to the bone, make sure not to injure the eye during surgery; and ensure a cut as described earlier for cutting an nail in small forces is followed. When the cut has been completed and all the flesh removed, oil from garlic or you distill the red colander like medicinal corrosives should be applied on top of the eye; and put cotton with egg white under it so that it properly covers any potential abscess. If there's nothing there but if it remains swollen and hot, if you suspect an abscess has formed then leave the eye and treat the abscess with soothing remedies for abscesses; then return to your surgery until the eye is healed in this manner, and thus complete as many flesh layers that are set into the eye by this process.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary that you treat each weak oil in the natural way; and also the accidental path, in iron work; and do not let your hand enter any of these works until you see that this limb endures that operation.
des voines des eulz	of veins and eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	When the veins are red that cover the eye, and tolerate their operation on the eye for days, it weakens the sight completely.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, at the first thing you should look for is the eye, where sebel resides. Apart from that, there's no other disease except sebel; then proceed in this manner: instruct the patient to place their head under your healthy guidance, and suspend those veins throughout the entire process according to your wisdom, and make the arteries subtle double as per this shape:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two ounces by degrees at each side according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And then continue to gently displace those fine veins, and expect the blood to drain for another hour, until you see those veins leave the eye; be careful not to cut into the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this operation at midday in front of the sun, and take great care in your work so that you do not remove more than just those veins. And when you have done this, apply a garland of green and red oil to disintegrate what remains from the inflammation.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to complete all this at that time, then apply a plaster of things that soothe the pain in the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and assured of the extraction of pus, then restart according to this manner which was before until it is cured; and this is the form of force:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the ear canal
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The method known as "arissati" ear fistula: when you cure it using cautery and hot water according to what I have said before, and if it is not cured yet, then open into the pus pocket in the area where it should die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is discovered, and you will see the corruption and the darkness, if you take out all the tool used as described; and call it "hard head", and be made of iron in the shape of half a dozen heads, and be sharpened like a sawblade just like its current form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on it the part of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your hands, and press your hand a little until you know that this corruption is removed; and do this once, then restore the area with medicinal desiccants.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	The lungs are sewn up, and hair grows out, and the belly of the womb is sewn, remaining like this for XL days, and it does not heal or turn into an abscess, and no bad events occur, knowing that it's healthy; if not so, there's no other way than to bring back the fistula to the nostril according to this shape: then use a metal tool to uncover the bone the second time with water and medicines, and when uncovered, take a piece of wood as per this shape, and make the metal rod three-angled, and the shaft be thinned out until it reaches the head as you can see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the lower edge of the collarbone, and hold your hand away from his eye for a moment. Then continue to push until it pierces the bone and you feel pain in that area as the veins come out when he holds his hand on his neck; then replace with dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the heat emerges and toughens your hands, take off at his neck; if something lighter comes out, this is good for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the opening of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes have fully opened and there is no disturbance to the neck or diminishment, it's necessary that you tie the patient. Then heal them, then place suction cups or hatel (a type of dressing) without piercing in order to suck out excess fluid, then put on an eye patch made from acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolle paste, and then strain the eyes, and plaster it with bandages and cloths; and the way you use the cloths should be that you take cloths that are quite soft enough to double each one in half twice (.iiij., four times), and then place them one on top of another according to the amount required by the eye. Then strain it from above using a stiff bandage, and repeat the suction without piercing; then remove the suction cups and leave the eyes strained day and night, and if the bandages disintegrate, do strain as much as necessary; then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see that the eye has healed, it's good; if not, start again with the plastering, cloths, bandages and suction cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the breaking of a veined cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the veined cloth, then open it and comes to pieces like small grains of resin, which are hard to see; thus when you see them covered, the works are such that you poke one needle into the base of the part below until up to halfway above, then poke another needle or with a double thread from the part behind the eye; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its placement; then cover with the double thread and tie a part of the membrane inside, and squeeze it well, then remove the needle and place wet linen wool on the eye with plenty of egg; and let it be as long as the thread is consumed along with the membrane, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound heals; and in no way should the wound be restrained by the membrane each part from a circle of cloth until it has healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes then show a large appearance, pierce them at the delicate spasm that comes from under the eye and corrects the moisture albuminous and lowers the eyes, and enters quickly; then remove it until it has healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the flow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is caused by bile that has escaped from the liver, resembling descending water, and it's not real water; and the way this ailment manifests involves having the patient sit upright and straight on their bed or chair, then hold your hands on either side of their head, and move them until you see bile come up over your eyes; then remove it quickly without allowing it to go down and disperse the light, observing the patient's condition closely as before; and if this doesn't start happening immediately, understand that there is water involved, and when the removal of bile isn't as effective as we've described here.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you are to make the patient sit between your hands, then take the delicate spatula and do it on the corneous membrane by making a cut starting from the tip of the conjunctive with the corneous membrane and crown until the bow comes out; and when she has come out, pour in the hot water sharp mixed with honey, or hot water that fenugreek has been boiled in and honey, then apply another cure once it is cleansed.
des aigues de l’oil	Regarding tears from the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the appearances of the aures in the division, and what needs to be pierced; if we operate according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from light for the sun, and tie up the healthy eye tightly; then put the paper of the eye on your left hand if they are to the left, or on your right hand if they are to the right; then take with your right hand, if they are to the left, the tool called "almagda", or with your left hand if they are to the right; then place the tip of the tool below the crown by a length equal to one finger in that region of the eye to the lower part of the inner eyelid, and force the tool called "almagda" properly, and rotate your hand until it pierces through the region under the eye, and feel that almagda reaches into the empty space; and it is necessary that the length of the pathway of almagda be at its maximum in relation to the size of the space which exists from the pupil to the end of the darkness; this is the cornea of the eye; if you see bone through the paper due to the clarity of the corneal tissue, then place the tool until it touches or is where the water is, and expel it down a channel after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	As soon as the metal heats up, so the ill person sees the tool before them and the instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After he rests for a short time, and the metal heats up in the second passage, apply force with the tool, and when it is securely in place and doesn't move upwards, gently extract it by twisting your hand back and forth; then heat some sand slightly again and remove the eye from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place the heated oil or wet wool in olive oil and plenty of eggs, and bind it with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and those that are ours in nature, let us apply them with plenty of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness (some people have particularly hard eyes), it is necessary that you take the tool called "alberit," which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then puncture only the conjunctiva, and do not go too far forward, but make it subtle. Then apply the sand, as we have said; and upon completion of the work, give the patient a restorative drink, who should sleep on their back in their own shadow. And refrain from all movements, and take light meats, and do not move their head to either side. Tie them according to their position until midday of the third day; then untie them within that same shadowy home, and test their sight, and let them see some things, and then reapply the bandage until seven days; and it is not advisable to perform this during or after current treatment or incision, but you should apply it because the hot metal has risen quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	For the extraction of abscesses comes that you release the eye before the seventh day and the remedy for one who alleviates an abscess; and when it is calmed, then release the hand and place on its forehead I a ringlet or cover for one day, and be in that dark house henceforth.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leaves the house little by little, and adapts to its case; know that no students should intervene in this situation.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one person came to us who was from the region of Arach, who told us that everywhere they use almond oil dressing, after which they drain the pus, but still I have never seen anyone like this in our land, nor have I ever read about it in ancient books; perhaps this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of alum, for he who does not know them sees them; and they are properly of arsenic:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And it is the head of those from this same subtlety, and the last at three angles of sickness.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh near the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	None of the times are born or raised with various added creatures, from which some seem like scorpions with feet of hens; and if there are such or if it has a character enhanced by red color, and if it has a character with good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In this case for those characters that are yellow and not enhanced, it is necessary that you place the patient between your hands facing the sun; work on his nose, and sprinkle herbs onto these creatures, then remove them; proceed as follows: hold in your hand what you can bear of a subtle sharp stick on one side, until you know that this creature has been pierced with all its bones.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains no substance we cannot cope with, when you open the entire body with all the surgical instruments very gently, ensuring nothing is left behind; and should there be no wound or abscess rupture, then apply gentle pressure as needed; and if it's an abscess, apply pressure carefully until it ruptures. If they are malignant ulcers, quickly act and cauterize immediately once the pus stops flowing and all edges are sealed, then rinse thoroughly with water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nose is involved and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that it is bleeding; and if moisture does not perforate as it should, know there's new tissue above the bone, where tools cannot cut: then you must take a linen thread somewhat thick, tie it by your hands, and leave an interval between each knot equal to one or less; and place this tool on the sick with the thread in their nose to push with strength, pull out until it goes through the nostril into the mouth; children often do this at school many times, and this is a simple thing for someone who wants to do so; then hold the head that comes out of the nostril with one hand, and the other head coming out from the mouth with the other hand, knowing which follows which as we are holding it.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Perform this as long as you know the flesh has decayed that part of it, then pull out the filth, evacuate the blood, apply moist with Egyptian ointment to the filth, and reinsert it right away like before; perform this for three days or longer, until the ointment dissolves all remaining decayed flesh; and afterwards put on a clove in the nostril for some days until it heals, and if there is need of dried medicine usage, use them; and this is the form of the tool to purify the head, with which oils and medicines or alcohol are distilled.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And make it of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and guide this as well; and if you see fit, make it a closed cane, and ensure your surgical tools are filled to purify the head; and have one hand on the head when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh near the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times, near the nose, a disease is born which is called "telul", it grows and becomes large until one can see it; and for this reason you should cover it at the beginning, and fully remove the bone, then place the cautery or burning medicine in its place; and if you delay covering it until it is large, beware if it is hard, changes color, loses sensation: do not touch it with iron as it contains an embedded abscess, for when one covers it once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is due to cold touch, not due to loss of color, and you see that it can be completely covered, let the patient breathe normally and treat the area with dry and restrictive substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose has been cut and sewn.
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when solutions of continuance come into one of these venous works, it benefits little, for in some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	So when such a thing happens to no one, then look if the wound is fresh at all of its blood; and then adjust the two lips with stitches, then treat it until it heals. And if the lips are yellowed on both sides, it's necessary that you burn off all parts of their edges until they heal, then bring together the two lips with stitches, tighten them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder and incense ground; and place a piece of plaster of lime or other welding plaster above the powders, and let it be until it discharges by itself, then treat with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the stitch is that you join the solution together: either with needles, as we have explained for the stitch in the abdomen; or with thread, which I have already told you.
des apostemes des levres	from abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hands should be inserted inside the abscess wound, similar to grains sometimes, smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary that you return the lips, cut through each nook, and take them with forceps and collect in each part; then after the vitriol incision, keep the hand under until the wound dries; and then remove the dressing, clean the lip of dry things until it heals.
de la char des gencives	from the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times, a piece of attached flesh originates on the gums, which the old ones called "albulus"; you should hold this with tongs and cut it at its root, allowing bleeding or blood to flow. Then put under the vitriol (sulfuric acid) or other retarding and drying powders. And if that flesh returns after cutting, and many times happens, if you cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after burning; these are the forms of tools to use for cutting.
des sordens	Of cauteries of fire command the ill to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Certain times are gathered at the root of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, those that are ugly and harsh; and certain times there is a black tooth and citrine one with worms as long as the decay comes to the gum, and they make the teeth stink; then it's necessary for you to hold the ill person between your hands, and let their head be on a pillow, and pull out each tooth or each piece of the harsh substance until nothing remains; and thus create blackness and verdure, jaundice and other colors, as long as they're removed; and if what comes off at the first attempt is good; if not, it starts again from the second day onwards, up to when you have everything pulled out; know that the teeth need different kinds of instruments for pulling them, depending on how the work shows them, because the rasers that remove teeth between the teeth have other shapes than those that remove teeth outside; and these shapes along with others should be prepared in front of you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary that when you treat the tooth for its pain, you delay pulling it as long as you can, because this should not be done lightly; indeed, this substance goes quite high up so one must have no excuse for the rasping.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	So when the patient is forced to bleed, you must be sure of which vessel to cut.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times, the pain causes the patient to bleed excessively. Take care that it's not an artery and ensure it's a vein before letting the blood flow out; yet do not let any part of the pain disappear until the illness is removed, as we have already shown in our medical students; when you are certain about which vessel to cut, be sure to cauterize inside the tooth up to 1. spasmile strongly to prevent gum damage everywhere around it; then move your hands or use your delicate tweezers close to the first pinch and pinch until it's well treated, ensuring that they are well placed afterwards; and place the bleeding of the patient under your saint between your knees, and keep your grip tight so it doesn't move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the right tooth without breaking it, if it doesn't fly out, take none of these tools and gently push them inside each section, and move them in the same way you did initially.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and broken inside, you should fill it with wadding where it was; and if you strain it gently with tongs, do not break it during the straining. It must be carefully worked under the gum to extract the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be sure to handle it carefully so you don't break it, and leave a part of it, causing greater pain from the wisdom of the root than at first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be aware that you should not do it like ignorant surgeons, who break the tooth once due to their haste and boldness, and don't correct themselves as we have advised. But instead, they bring about this frequent operation due to this great disease from the roots where they stay or because of the tooth they break, just as we often wish. And when the tooth is pulled out, wash the mouth with wine or vinegar; and if bleeding occurs after, which happens quite frequently, wash your mouth with vitriol juice; and if that doesn't work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the tools, to which you first get your teeth into, should be long pointed and have big handles, so they do not bend when you pull on the tooth; and these are their shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And may have large members that do not bend while pulling, and be made of well-made iron, and be toothed for gripping.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains during extraction, it is necessary to place wet cotton with butter inside for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	Until the bones are pulverized, and indeed, place the forceps known as "algfi" where it seems that the physician's bone should be; they must also be made inside like a file, which is its form.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these tongs, then you must uncover the entire flesh right up to the root, and place the tool known as "altalhi", which is essentially a spike, in that manner:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And make it so that neither breaks or swells, and if the root jumps out through this, it's good; if not, use all the tools you have, as their forms come next:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if help is taken from this tool which has two prongs, as its form is shown here:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front according to the order of teeth, and this tool which seems like a large pair of tongs, as its form is shown:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this tool be such that it cannot break, and know that few tools of bone exist; and also other tools, which are not counted; and the skilled surgeons find their instrument by themselves, according to what their work and disease show them, for there are parts of diseases where old instruction did not teach a tool because of the diversity among others and if it breaks from wear or from the rest of bones, or if it decays, so he searches among the tools that suit him, which I have told you about, and helps with gestures, as is described here:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And may they be large and well holding to hold the bone, so that it doesn't escape but can be held and removed; and then restore at its place with medicine suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and if it is small, then use all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and the shape is ugly, especially in virgins, it's necessary for you to know whether the tooth was born after another one, and wasn't placed straight, and can't be pulled or filed: then pull it out; and if it is together with a tooth, take this instrument described here, which resembles two small hooks, and made of sharp iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the tooth is extracted bit by bit in my hands due to its hardness, and because you do not move others, and if it can be seen that one could grind it out, then I will grind down with one part of the file as this shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the file used to make needles; and I grind the tooth bit by bit in my hands lightly, so that you do not move until it finishes; then make it flat at the end with all tools, and if it's too sharp and irritates the tongue, then you should grind down the roughness until it is even, so as not to irritate the tongue or damage speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth swells
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth in front of the gum line, through percussion or mashing, and when the patient can't press into it what they chew without defecating, and once you've treated them with restricting medicines, if this fails; then they must be restrained by a golden thread because silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never does; choose threads that are neither too thick nor too thin depending on the space between the teeth. And when you see to straighten teeth, take the thread and the double needle between two healthy teeth, then place the dislocated tooth in between diseased teeth if there is one or more, until you can perceive a healthy tooth from another side; then start covering again up to where you previously covered, and gently and skillfully tighten your hand, until it doesn't move. And secure your tie at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then hold the teeth with a thread on some pincers, and join them together, putting them back between the healthy tooth, and then place it so as not to irritate the tongue; and leave it like this as tight as he can endure, if it slips or the threads come undone, tie it again with another thread; if it stays here and serves thus throughout its duration, and this is the form of the teeth and the layout of the two healthy teeth, and of the two middle ones, just as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is lost, you set it back to its place piece by piece as we have explained; and do not interfere with anything that is not fit and endure pain, nor at any time make the shape of a bone tooth from a cow, and put it in the place where the defect exists, and tighten it as we have said, and stays like this serving for as long as possible.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the wound of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	None of the cords that come from under the tongue or its natural position when we are born; or by accident during a healed wound; and the operations should be such as you work on the mouth with the patient, place your head in good health, lift the tongue; then tie the nervous cord as wide as necessary until the tongue is displaced from its position. If there's stiffness or swelling, especially if it's due to an immediate healing of a wound, clip off the hook and tie again more widely. And be sure that the cut isn't too deep because there might be an artery under it; when you're done, then lift the head until it turns pinkish-red or blue, then put on ice underneath the tongue; and treat each night so that they don't stick together.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if blood comes out, then put sulfur on the wound; and if it does not heal, then apply slow-burning cautery which is good for this; afterwards treat with other remedies until the healing is done.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see that it's of any color or black or hard, and the patient doesn't feel it, don't touch it because it's a boil; and if it's turning towards pus, and there's moisture, then use the hook tool to puncture it with a subtle incision from both sides, and heal it from one side and the other; and if it doesn't stop draining in your procedure, place vinegar on it until it is healed completely. Then return to your procedures as long as you are using force; then lift the head from coolness and perspiration, and apply further healing methods until it's fully recovered.
des apostemes de la gorge	extracting abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No time comes within the throat canals that are called "godath", and they're properly known as the two almond-shaped glands. When you treat them, like we said in the division section, and if they aren't healed yet, then be careful: if these are firm, small, sensitive lumps with a reddish color, don't touch them even with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they're red and the root is large, don't touch them even with iron for blood flow. Leave them until they heal, then you can remove them; or they might burst on their own. If they have a white coloration and the root is fine, prepare your tools to cover them, but first check if the abscess has resolved and calmed down.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient stand in front of the sun, and have their head under your control, and the operation makes them open their mouth and the surgeon presses the tongue down to all the instrument, as this is how it's done; and have the tools made from silver or thin steel just like knives.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can't you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the pus-filled blister? Take one and put it into the almond, then pull it upwards more than you can; remove nothing from the threads, then extract with the tool, as depicted here; it looks like a force. And both the head is placed upright, and one part after another are extremely sharp, and made of iron or silver.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this tool at hand, use tweezers instead, as depicted here:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And make cuts on one side and the other name; and when you have performed one of the almonds, perform the other in the same manner, and after cutting gargle the patient with hot and cold water, as well as a gentle flow of blood occurs, then gargle with hot water or slices from cooked cherry tomatoes or laurel leaves, and similar things, until the saliva is fully cleansed; then continue the cure until it is healed; and no other abscesses are born in the throat than the two almonds, so perform them accordingly like the two almonds evenly.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, which is called the small abscess; and had tightly closed all of the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage and could neither eat nor drink, and died if she remained like this for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscesses had risen so high that it had caused two rows of tears to form under each nostril.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I quickly performed this operation and removed a lump from one side, then the other, extracting much pus. Then I made cuts on both sides of his neck near the jaw and opened up to see inside. After that I cleaned out these abscesses and took some part of them; only a little blood came out. And so after I performed all these steps, it was done, I let my patient swallow water and then wine, not stopping in cutting away from those abscesses for a long time; the abscesses began to grow back immediately filling up the space I had emptied, until it got quite large; then I closed them again by cauterizing inside the throat: thus he stopped growing. And I moved on from these parts and God did with him what happened after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When swelling descends to the eye, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called 'perpendicular'; and if it is off in size being round, it is called 'eye'.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it has been treated as we have said in the division, and the cure doesn't help, and you see that the extraction of pus is calmed, and it is subtle, then it's necessary to remove it; and that one which is round and assembled isn't long; and it's bloody or of a reddish color or black, so it's necessary for you to avoid making an incision on it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger in the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said about its blench and length, you should have the patient face the sun, and press their tongue against the tool as we have described before; then insert the needle into the eye, pull it outwards, and remove it with the two tools mentioned in the incision of two almond-like objects.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it must be that you do not remove more fluid than is beyond the natural limit; for if you remove too much, it harms both speech and action. And after incising, use what we have instructed in our treatment of the two almond-shaped organs, and cleanse until healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears losing their sense of smell due to bleeding, it is necessary that you apply means for the cautery of their sense of smell.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the method of cautery is by hot iron.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And when the patient's sense of smell returns to your health, then press their tongue with the tool we have mentioned or as explained in the treatise on cautery, and pour in fresh, sharp water, ensuring it is neither too thick nor too thin; and use the movement of that tool, which is described here:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let my head have a hair where I apply the medicine, like the movements of a spoon, and place the tool over all the medicine on the eye; and let the patient rest with their head on its side so that saliva and the mucus flow from their mouth to the medicine inside, but not down to the throat or causing pain; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see that it has dried and the effects of the medicine are reduced; and if you see this, take cotton and envelop it with any tool, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the tool on top of the cotton on wax, so that the cotton burns into the eye while it's damp; and do this often until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and wait for four to five days. And if you need to repeat the medicine cautery procedure, then do it again, after which clean around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and clean off anything left of the medicine; and rinse with cold water, and treat with gargling until healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or using the cautery; if it's treated with fumigation in this way, take calendula and ipecacuanha and oregano and rue and chamomile and lettuce and similar herbs, and combine them all or some of them into one pot, put them there, and bring it to a boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and inside the pot place two sticks according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And whether it's silver or iron, and if one of the shoulder bones is placed in the mouth against the patient as long as the vapor rises to the testicle through the scrotum until the testicle is necrosed; after this be repeated often, until the testicle dries out. And ensure you do not perform this at the beginning of the abscess eruption, because many things occur; and do not carry out this procedure when the abscess is declining.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a reed and put an eggshell in the patient's mouth, so that the heat of the wound does not become too hot; for the eggshell does not allow steam to accumulate on the mouth, and together with these remedies it provides good treatment for health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times, you may use the os or spine of a fish bone, with no need for anything else; if so, then it is suitable that you remove what you can see, and press your tongue against the sun on all the tool, until you see movement. For what cannot be seen opening in the throat, it's necessary to make the patient vomit out the diseased part so that the food becomes cooked in their stomach; if by chance this forceful expulsion fails to remove the disease; or if the disease swallows a piece of sponge, or belly button, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread; bind the sponge with thread and then swallow it. And when she comes to your mouth, you will see steam rise, and then proceed to force an expulsion; and if this doesn't come out from what we have mentioned, then take one tool shaped like lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And ensure the tools are adjusted near the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the head raised high; take care not to touch the epiglottis, letting nothing go through or pushing the bone inwards; instead guide the patient when they push the tool, as if they move or if something is too tight; should it be pushed down, or pull it forcefully with all the tool evenly, until she can do so.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the saliva of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never treat the sinews alone, as I've mentioned in division, through medicine treatment; and if this does not help, then look into the throat of the wound towards the sun, then press the tongue onto the tool that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see blood, guide it out with gentle pinching or use delicate pincers suitable for this task.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that doesn't work, take a thread and guide it into the throat of the sick person. Then push or pull at the point where the thread catches in the flesh; do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if you bathe the patient with water every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full glasses of cold water and pour them into the mouth, then let it flow down without being swallowed, and move it with their hand often. And as soon as the water feels cool in their stomach, they will vomit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if she doesn't vomit as we have said, subfumigate the patient with asafetida, using the instrument I mentioned for the fumigation of the eye. Do this many times because it will expel without causing harm.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way of fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are glowing charcoal embers, and have it covered with a pierced cover in the middle, and this hole catches the end of the instrument; then pour your fumigation, and have the patient put the tip of the reed in their mouth, seal the mouth so that no smoke escapes but goes to the lungs; and now the saliva will be expelled, and if it does not come out, start the fumigation repeatedly; and allow the patient thirst and give them salty things and such, and do not let them drink water; then it is necessary for her to come out forcefully with this management.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the tool used for bleeding, when it can be seen, resembles curved scissors meant to cut into the throat; and it has a similarity to the tip of a surgical scalpel, and it is sharpened like a rasp, so whatever she takes does not slip away; here's its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Holes for discharges resemble what memory recalls from one to another in this book, and they differ in puncturing and sizing; and there are two ways to do this, with one being similar to its appearance, and concerning moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for when the limbs are inside the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses in the head are different from those in the foundation, and the abscesses in the inner flesh are different from those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in action.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And with abscesses one should not pierce them until the body is dead according to its development; and for those that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their development, such as abscesses beneath joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come beneath joints, and if they are pus-filled inside, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint might be corrupted, which is a cause for contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is within the main limb, and if you delay puncturing until it's dead, it will harm the main limb. Or if it's within the foundation, then if you pierce through or in such a way that it becomes dead; it should not be that you puncture an abscess without proper digestion being completed, except for when it's within the foundation, which could inflame internally and lie deep inside, leading to fistulas; and cannot heal properly over a long period.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it must be known when the time for perforating an abscess that is dead according to its maturation, which is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and reduction of pain and flush, and the movement and firmness of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it should be ensured that you place the perforation site above the abscess or as closely as possible to where it opens outwards, and if the perforation is along the length of the body, and if the abscess is located at hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places where there is no crease.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	When they bend, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are within the fatty tissue, if there's any movement you must let the puncturing until proper digestion has been completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce before that moment, then the poison from within spreads throughout his body and fills with heaps of filth; and by chance hardens his flesh and the underlying parts.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there are no abscesses pierced through the width of the body, according to what the limb needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you apply small punctures, small cuts; and in large abscesses, large cuts, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses or if it requires a knife cut, and covering; when they have become as a piece of cloth, and are flattened, then you should do this as one does with infants: and those that split into three angles, and those that are covered like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of corners; and those where you make an oval-shaped cut, and other cuts and cutting shapes.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who do not have a head, such as superficial abscesses, it is necessary to fully pierce them. And when the abscess is large and has formed a large lump, you should pierce it, but not drain all of the pus at that moment, rather only remove a portion; then stop the pus until the other side, then leave nothing hanging down immediately after; do this repeatedly from large to small, until the pus comes out entirely. Likewise if the body has weak strength, or pregnant women, or young children, or elderly and decrepit individuals.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For when one tries several times with blood coming out, perhaps killing the patient, you should not neglect this.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore be cautious of this chapter, and when you have made your incision, if there is a wound, look at the size of the wound from the incision; and if it's clear-cut, use linens or pieces of cotton to apply; and if it's large with many pus pockets, then it is necessary that for each you make a tent so they stick together; and if you have cut into some part of the skin in your incision and sewed it inside, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or linen rags without moisture, and bind up to three days; then set it and treat with ointment until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs in your operation, use cold water and ease it, with moisture to cover the wound, then place it upright being operated on multiple times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if bleeding continues, apply government and treatment, and the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it's or near a stream, and the area where the operation took place or the abscess is mostly nervous, then you should put on mosquito nets and cloths soaked in wine and oil; and if it's on skin, and the wound is fleshy, then you should apply cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil until the third day as we have said; and then remove the dressing and wipe and treat as necessary, until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to understand universally in the treatments of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here begins this chapter.
des soros	of the stones
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Small boils come out at the head, and their methods resemble us that are in cloths, such as a gallbladder of a cat, and much like them there are similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and such where there is moisture as in worms; and there are some that are hard and stony to the cutter, and there is no doubt that they are arteries and do not go against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the parts of cutting are such that you need to try all the instruments which are called "entrismisor", from whose form comes this following, containing something.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then cut through its longness above.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, then scorch without leaving anything behind the skin containing that moisture, because it returns immediately if you leave nothing. Then dip a cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; if not, in water and vinegar, and apply it to the wound, leaving it until the next day; and this will heal what has been left during the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And proceed to use the cotton bandage again, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know that it does not stay in place during the night; then treat the wound with ointment of what is suitable, until it heals.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds onto its fat, cut it according to this form, along its long axis; and pull out all your threads, and burn everywhere around it, and apply your entire treatment in a protective bandage where it is located; and if it severs against you, then do what I have told you to after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also handle the abscess if it is stone-like, and cut and treat it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when cutting on the stone-like abscess and moist skin, it will be lighter because there is less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if in any of these abscesses or head it does not have moisture, and from these new formed abscesses that I removed from the head of an old woman; and found the abscess as hard as a stone, coarse and white, and could not break it; and if one had pierced none of them, one would have made the same wound on them as on a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or going, it was like those that come from the heads of children and from the roots of the ears, if there is an opening for them on all days up to maximum dependency upon them, so that the blood can leave; and the treatment should be done as it should.
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times there occur such abscesses in the neck, and from under the chin, and near the lungs, and nowhere else on the body or face, and they are small, being bound together one with another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrophula is properly within its coat, as the nut and the abscess at the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrophulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not want to submit to treatment.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In such cases that you observe with a good disposition towards the gallbladder, and it appears like the color of the liver, it remains silent from each side and is not pressed near the neck or on the artery or in the conduit, and is not deep; it should be that you grasp it from above, and burn each part, and flatten the two lips of the mouth as far as possible if necessary, as we have said about abscesses at the head; and handle it little by little, and be careful not to cut off the nerve or the vein, and do not let there be a lot of smoke and cutting, that your hands don't escape and don't go too far ahead, so you don't remove more than what you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it doesn't allow opening, then put vitriol paste in the wound, or any powders that stop blood flow, and restrain the wound; and leave it until the abscess subsides, and the wound softens, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the blood has stopped flowing, return to your task until it is finished; then look at your duty's sign if there are any small spots remaining, if you remove and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein under the pockmark at its root, it must not be that you cut that pockmark in its root, but tie it with a thick double thread, and let it fall out through it without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then treat.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove all the scrophula (a type of skin disease), it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound, and stitch now, because there is no excess left due to the size of the scrophula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	And it is necessary that you understand how to treat its root, drain the pus, and stitch as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrophula that have excess, puncture where it opens; and puncture in this manner as previously mentioned, while depending on it. Then apply ointments and similar treatments, so that the corruption consumes what is left behind; and when the wound has been thoroughly cleaned, then the ointment treatment should be continued until the flesh grows back, until it heals completely.
de squinance	regarding obliquity
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old men spoke of how to make an incision in the throat; but I never saw anyone do it here, and this is written down from their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squinting vision, it is necessary that the incision made in the throat which is called 'epiglottis' be avoided; and one should not offer aid by this method, because all the veins and the heart are close to the patient who has pus in their mouth or in the throat or between two almonds.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is within the channel of the heart, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut through three or four small slits across, between the two circles or by the size of the slit thereon, not within the cartilage; and such a cut makes it suitable for cutting the epiglottis so that no flesh remains, and the vessels are long from it.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the surgeons are fearful, it is necessary for them to stretch the throat skin all the way up to the trachea, then cut through the windpipe until it reaches the chest; and avoid the blood vessels, should you see any thing at all, and then close that wound site as we have said; and this has been demonstrated by the section of the blood stream of the windpipe which jumps out from the ruptured area, and by lack of voice function; and leave the incision open for a bit.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time has passed where one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound as neatly as possible, and all the skin without the cartilage; then administer medicines that create flesh, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis insists that one should not perform this until the throat is entirely blocked, and the patient is judged dead, and the defect is evident.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then stitch up the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe normally, and they will breathe through the wound, hence keeping them alive from death; this was according to the instruction that the elders would leave the wound open until the disease's malady has passed, which indeed passed after three or four days. And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and clean it, until it had healed; and I will tell you what I observed.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I witnessed a maiden who took the knife and stabbed it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe. And I was summoned to heal her, and found her just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found that blood was issuing from it, and indeed, there wasn't a cut or exit for the blood other than the throat, and the wind flowed through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I rushed and cleansed the wound as well as I could until she was healed; and to the maiden there was nothing left but for her to be hoarse, and she returned after that to her usual state. For this reason I say that in the crafting of the epiglottis, one should not fear.
de la grosse gorge	From the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Cysts called "gullet hernia" are known as large cysts with a blackish hue, and they occur frequently in women. They can happen in two ways: naturally or by accident; natural ones do not have an opening.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidents occur in two ways, of which one resembles fat we know, and the other way resembles cysts coming from us through an artery; there is fear here, and it does not involve making incisions except for small ones. Only do this if you are able to thoroughly examine every part: If you find it just like fatty tissue that cannot reach any vein, cut it out as you would cut fat, and remove it together with its outer cover, if there's anything left; thoroughly search everywhere and cure it appropriately until it is completely healed.
des nous	from now on
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways are there to treat us, of which I will mention all the similarities; now it is fitting that I explain the entire distinction between us and what follows.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is characterized by heat and fever lasting until the body's secretions have passed and putrefaction has occurred; then, the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the new, there is no fever or pain and contains pus, which is its own sac and is in accordance with the color of the body's flesh and begins similarly to a boil, becoming large; and are according to two appearances, greasy or moist, and much of the color as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to treating the new, that you first test and inquire about all the instrument which is called 'intromissor', according to what its shape comes or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the way of probing pus in us is that you seek the greasiest part of it than what you find in the abscess and twist your fingers a little by a little until you know that the instruments have reached the body, then as according to the size of the abscess; then extract the pus, and take care not to break.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture cuts through it, whatever color it has, if you do as I said of the other abscesses; and if after the incision no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then cut accordingly like what I have said about the others, and once it doesn't come out with forceps again, take hold of it with tweezers and lightly scrape off each side and remove the bandage where it was located, for you must pull the whole thing clean along with the nodule; and if you cannot pull it clean, then remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if nothing remains and it reoccurs many times; and if some does remain but doesn't bother you, use powders that are corrosive to fill the wound, hold the wound still, place hot wadding on the abscesses, and treat it with other treatments until it is clean. And if there is a lot of pus, sew up two sides of the wound, and treat what is covered by the bandage.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is too close to be treated in opposition or otherwise if there's urgency, then use the site of vitriol juice and let it take its course for two or three days, as long as the wound heals, and rest with the boiling of blood; then return to coppering where some has remained from new.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the surgical instruments used for incision, they come in three ways: large, medium, and small. There are also three that are called 'albaret', and one that is referred to as 'breb'. They exist in three types: large, medium, and small, for enclosing abscesses and fistulas. They are like needles used for tying threads, made of arnica citrin, iron or silver. The yellow ones work well with blacking for encircling the bends of fistulas. There are three kinds according to the quantity of the width of the perforations: large, medium, and small.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of knives resemble these: large, medium, and small. There are also incision blades with two bends in three ways; those with three bends and are also in three ways; there are blades with two bends and single-bend blades as well, all in three varieties. All these are necessary according to their type.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of this person they sharpen, and among these there are who do not cut with force but only from one side; thus we burn their noses, because in this case one neither cuts the vein nor the nerve. And of these intrusive instruments, the blades are placed in handpieces, so that the patient does not notice at the opening of abscesses; and they come in three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see; and none is used to exert force except in soft flesh, like legs, arms, nipples, and elbows, and alike among them; and in no other case do we use another tiny instrument resembling excisions on the penis, according to this form, to which one stops blood flow:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed only once in the healthy part that closely divides veins and arteries, and not according to this large shape:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	None of the men's nipples swell when they begin to become corrupted, until they resemble women's nipples; and they remain swollen and puffed up, and those who want to cure them should do so according to this form of this line .b. up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Trim the fat then apply medicine to the wound's edge. Then stitch together both edges of the wound and treat it until it heals fully. And if the chest is tilted downward due to size like in women, cut through this into two stich lines above by similar splits; making one connect with the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape here: from here .b.to here .g. Then burn off the skin between the two edges and remove the fat. Apply what we have described about stitching and powders as well as necessary treatments until it heals fully. And if it has not healed or the incision is not complete, because the body will not settle or due to blood leaking out during treatment, it's necessary to fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment; leave this until the ointment and fat can be removed then treat it further until fully healed.
des apostemes des asselles	removal of abscesses and gallstones
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Wounds that occur from abscesses are manners of hard scrophulas, and if there are any containing moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should have their cuts made according to this form, from line .b. to the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus inside the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment as needed until the wound heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses resemble smallpox, then cut them as we have said in cuts of smallpox, and if the wound is clean, then apply the cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	From the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When it comes to an artery, and the skin is stitched where it's open, many times pus forms, and just like with that at a punctured vein and pus; and if one knows this when it's due to an artery, then the pus will be long and full; and when you feel it with your fingers, you'll sense constriction; and when it's about a vein, there is no leakage or appearance of pus; and treating such pus is foolishness, and similarly when it is amidst wounds and swellings, and elsewhere like in the neck and around mutton or other parts, and they are very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, it is necessary to avoid the iron cure, and that for the head should also be avoided. When it comes to one who is inflamed by an artery, they should sew above the skin as long as possible; then perform tailoring at the inch marks, and beautifully separate the artery from the tissues, until it's fully revealed; then insert a probe under this one, and pierce till the other side, and tighten the artery with double thread on both sides according to what I have taught you in extracting the two arteries that are in temples; then cut off the area between the two lines using an intervening thread as long as there is pus flowing through it, and thereby release the pus; then apply the cure that dries out thereafter until the string lets out pus; then treat this with ointment until it heals; and if the pus comes from the vein's size, you should color your hand with the contents of the pus over all the skin. Then insert a needle under the skin you hold in your hand, pierce it, and have double thread ready so that you pull it on the other side; then tie the pus, as I have said, or tie threads from both parts to both shoulders using this string; and if you doubt whether the string lets out pus, you should insert another needle under all the pus near the first hole and tighten the strings in four places; then cut off the excess pus until it stops flowing, then cut away the excess with scissors and leave what is tied. Then place a moist cloth covered in wine and oil on top of one side, then apply cures and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	abcesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As with pus that comes into the artery and vein, pus enters the lungs when they are cut, or due to excessive labor, and similar occurrences.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often with shoulders and elbows and in all places where joints are present. And this is the case for pus filled abscesses, and their color seems to be like that of flesh, and exists in many positions without pain; and when they are restricted in form, if feels as if the body is hurting, but not throughout, only around the bone; and moves well from all directions, neither forward nor backward, neither above nor below, and one who is in joints should not cover with iron: there might be a contraction by accident; and that which is at the head or forehead causes the skin to become inflamed.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscesses are small, if you have tweezers, and pinch them at their base; and if they are large, if you suspend them up to the elbow, and slice, then scrape, then extract the pus, and then suture the wound together. And treat until it heals properly.
des grosses boces pendans	Large boils hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	In every abdomen and nowhere else appears the lumpul, it is a disease which is called 'fungus' by its appearance, and has a subtle root, and large heads; there are small ones and very big; I saw one person who had two bellies that resembled fungi more than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had tiny roots, were cracked, and corroded from moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I found them in the first one weighing XVIII onces (around 360 grams), and in the second one VI З. (around 120 grams). In the incisions, if you observe that the tissues are moist, and the color of the artelul is white and moist with a subtle root; when you touch it, it feels like fat under your hand, and you should apply the fire cautery to it.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For when the surgeon comes there are many times great blood losses, and if it cannot be avoided, then quickly use a cautery; and if you see the patient frightened and fearful from the incision of the iron, take a well-made thread and bind the tool as we have said, and leave for two days; and then restrain, and do not cease to pull on the thread until it catches the tool, with no trouble; and if the roots are large, fear catching them by the belly, but you can well catch half of them, then cauterize so that they don't swell up again; then treat the wound, and make sure you do not catch the wire which is of pale color and has little sense and milk appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene next.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the bile flows freely
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	The appearance of the boil comes from the cauterization of wounds or tears in the scrotum, and it is on the abdomen and there are some boils, as happens in other ruptures, or blood that leaks from veins or arteries according to what was mentioned previously, or due to windiness; and if it's through the rupture in the scrotum and through the opening of the boil, its color resembles the color of the pus, and is a light thing without pain, and opens from diverse outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the passage of an intestinal obstruction, then it is more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers if it returns, and then comes back, and by chance if it gets stuck, and expands quite a bit at the entrance during bathing and due to strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it's due to moisture, it's a simple matter and opens well when you press with your hand, not restraining; and if it's due to blood, open through these signs the large and hard abscesses, and they penetrate according to an amount; and if it's due to wind, it stings at the finger, and the pus is such that you should look to see whether its appearance is due to arterial or venous blood, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you allow the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear in it, as I have explained in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if its appearance is due to the intestine or the gallbladder, it is necessary that you order the patient to bleed their anus, and have them extend completely straight, then pierce all around the wound; then direct treatment with vinegar between your hands, then proceed inside the body where you signified, until reaching almost all of the pus, then leave half of the abscess above the entire large hook; then tie it firmly with a strong thread or a thick silk cord, and secure the connection tightly; then cover half of the pus extended over the thread, and bend your index finger, grasping the intestine; if you find that it is caught by the thread, release it, and pull the intestine out to exit the belly; and if you find the gallbladder, take hold of the hook, removing any excess; and if the artery or vein causes opposition, proceed inside as planned, taking two needles, then pierce them through what you have pierced with your needle; then tighten the pus in four passes over the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, let the body heal naturally, and expel the dead meat by itself; or cut it when it becomes delicate and cooked, then treat the area as necessary, and clean up the wound.
dou chancre	and the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed the appearances of the ulcer and how to handle it with medicines, and how to avoid iron treatment; let us speak of the ulcer that is in the marrow, and there is great caution needed in its treatment, as the ancients said. If the ulcer is in a place where you can scrape it out, like one on the breast or in cooking utensils, and other similar places, then you should remove it entirely when it's just starting; but if it's large and old, don't attempt to touch it, because I have never known anyone to recover from such ulcers; no one ever recovers from them in front of me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the works, when it is in place or can be taken out, as we have said, you must purge the patient of black bile only once; then let a surgeon treat him if he shows signs of fullness, then remove the black bile to where it needs to be for surgery. Then wash your hands and hair thoroughly everywhere without leaving anything behind; and let bleeding occur completely while you keep pressure on the area with your hand or nothing else, and if the bleeding goes against the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize until the wound is cleaned; then treat it again until he heals.
de ydropisie	Regarding dropsy (edema)
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have spoken about the signs of typhus in division, and how this assembly of water is made, and the signs for each sign, and the treatment which is done by medicines, and that which is treated by iron: these are the only clear points; and one should not touch with iron in these two signs: that being, tympanites and yposarche, as it is a deadly thing; so when you use medicines to treat this sign of typhus known as 'eclites' using medicines, and the treatment does not help, if you find the patient weak or has another disease besides typhus, for example stomachache and similar things; then do not touch with iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient's condition to be very green, and they only have typhus without other illness, and they are neither too old nor too young, then you should act as follows: gently lift the green part of their body upwards on your hands, and let assistants press the abdomen towards the lowest part of their buttocks while pouring water from above to this lowest point, then take a thin instrument like a needle according to this shape:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be two trenches.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Make a point, and ensure it doesn't go too deep so that it can reach the intestines when inserted, without being able to cut them; then observe if there is peritonitis spreading towards the intestines: should this be the case, you must open three inches directly above the belly button. And if there is peritonitis due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the abdomen three inches. And if it's because of pus, it should be on the right side; but it's not suitable that the sick lies on the cut where excess fluids don't flow to the weak area. Then pierce all the skin with an instrument and remove it, lifting your hand through the entire subcutaneous tissue as you would sear in a quantity of one nail or more than that until you can see water leaking out; then force the opening further into the peritoneum until the pus appears, this is the source of water, then apply force with the tool described above.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a slender silver rod, and one made of spider or ironwood is lighter, and it is in the part above I small bumps; and if located on one side, three bumps; and two on another side, and one on another; and the shoulder is cut so like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the writer cuts into the feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the aumele, so when the instruments come into water, they now separate above the instrument; drain it then either half or one-third of it. For if you drain more than it should at this time, by chance the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit of the weapon, or he faints, or he approaches death; but drain according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue in the patient signify, and its pulse; then take the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now for the heating that affects the bump which is on the syphilitic area, from which I have spoken, that you penetrate in this manner; then repeat the instrument another day if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw a small quantity of water. Do this no other days, and avoid going too far until it does not remain but a little bit of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you are uncertain about the patient, leave a bit of water on them, so that the burial or sand heats up, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and if they turn pale; and drink as directed. And treat with drying medicines until it is sane, then cauterize over the stomach and liver after the extraction of the water, as I have said previously.
de l’estopement de la verge	Regarding the stoppage of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without a foreskin on their penis, or if the foreskin is small, or it does not stay in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it suits to pierce it right away, like the soft pus filled substance very finely according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place or fasten the foreskin of the substance finely on it, hold and keep like this for three or four days until it wants to urinate. If it desires to pee, open the opening and let urine come out, then put it back again; and by chance there is no need, because the urine that comes out doesn't allow it to stay closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those with small breasts, if they wish to increase their size, if there is a treatment similar to that of the apple tree, as we have said, if it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who lack breasts in their body are blind, for no one is born with breasts at the tip of their penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards; and they cannot have children because the matter cannot reach up to the anus, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way to do this is for the patient to lay on his back, then lift the head of the penis and the scrotum as well as large as a feather's tip, so that the bits are spread out in the middle, just like it should be; and beware of bleeding which occurs many times, and if it happens, stop it with the one who stops blood flow, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	The boils on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times pustules appear in the penis, and there is a sight of unpleasant appearance; and among them, some are malicious and others are not. It's necessary for you to take .5 ounces of these carefully, extract and cleanse them all, then place moistened cotton with Egyptian ointment on it; after that, cure it with diafinicon ointment until it heals.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the illness is malignant, with pus coloring and discharging, it is necessary that you apply the cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have done so, and if the pus is inside the penis, and has part within the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the pus that is inside first; and when it is healed, then treat from the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it all together, ensure that the head of the penis is not pierced, and comes blackness and corruption within its penis or anus; then remove everything that is black and corrupted, afterwards apply over the plaster made from honey and flour, which is prepared with walnut shells and several times, then cure with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And when the bleeding persists, if you apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauterizations should take two positions together: namely, during bleeding and corruption; if the head of the penis is corrupted and removed, it's necessary that you pinch or guide the penis with a clove, letting the patient pass urine amongst this. And when the hair is pulled away from the tip of the penis which has remained uncircumcised or due to injury or abscess, then it's proper that you burn it with a pen knife until all ties are released and the head of the penis is freed of hair everywhere; if performing surgery in such cases is problematic, then it's necessary to burn it at the frenulum anywhere around the tip of the penis and under the skin. Then cut neatly between two, and place a fine linen bandage soaked in cold water on top so that it doesn't pull too close.
de la circoncision	Regarding circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not just about cutting off continuation like other wounds; nonetheless, when we perform this work of our own will and on infants, it's necessary that we do the best job and the lightest for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old did not refer to circumcision of their children, for they did not practice it in their laws, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	But I have wanted the majority of the masters and the nobles who practiced circumcision within a day or two after birth, and throughout the entire foreskin; it was necessary that they use two threads because there are two layers, and by chance one might use these above and the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	One receives it from the head covering, and the pain is doubled, and at the dislocation where there is a doubt in its direction, the point of the limb; and at the dislocation of the nail by chance escaped the blow, and went off work, and many times grow thus that they do not need dislocation and I have wanted.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	In dislocation that is made with force, I found the advantage of experience, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you press your hand, cut it evenly into an 'I' shape with all tension; but let the threads be well intertwined within the skin; and make sure to use the technique of the first operation so that the child thinks when they hear sounds, that you're only tying the thread around the penis just like this, then perform it in every way possible. Afterward place the child straight between your hands, and position the forces between your hands or under your feet where they can't see any tools; then pull your hand on the penis and blow or whisper softly, and drag it upwards until the testicles of the penis are enclosed; then thoroughly clean off the dirt that has gathered. Next tie a loop at the top with double thread, then attach this from one loop to another. And hold this by half the second in the crotch and under the middle finger, press between these two loops, then lift your thumb quickly and pull the head of the penis; then let the bleeding stop gradually as this is the healing process. Apply powder generously with the powder, and cover it with a dabbed glue from a raw, simmered egg mixed with rose water, combined with fresh rose oil and baste over it until it's cured on the second day, and continue treating until fully healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The method for performing the operation of purification is as follows: both ends should be held firmly and should cut straightly, and they should make the ends as long as an equal hand.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The mistake of the world's creation happens when the kidneys inside move during an incision; hence it is necessary to extend them up to your nail, so that the kidneys make an abscess; and do it evenly, and if you cannot hold it up to your nail, then use tweezers, and then do it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they penetrate for three days, and what is below the penis becomes swollen, leave it until the pus from the abscess subsides, then lightly scrape; do it as much as you can move, and avoid touching the part of the penis, for that will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with powders as we have instructed in our treatment of powders, and if you move beyond the kidney too far, and it goes above, it will do no harm; thus treat it, as we have said, until it heals.
dou retenement de l’urine	The retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Retention of urine arises from stone formation, or frozen blood, or bowels obstruction, or a dead fetus, or similar cases as we've described in the division. If the patient is unable to relieve their retention and you notice it's due to a stone obstructing either inside or at the neck of the bladder, it's necessary that the patient be held with their knees bent; place their feet towards their backside, and lay them flat on their stomach so their belly is extended beyond their back. Hold the patient upright as much as they can bear. Then force the neck of the bladder to express the stone above, which helps relieve urine retention. If this doesn't happen as we've described, if instead the patient feels intense pain, then it's necessary that you apply an extraction with all the equipment called 'syringe', here is its description: made finely from subtle silver thread like a bird feather; and be of palm length plus half, and should be slender at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the way of expulsion of the urine is as follows: take a double thread and tie it to the end of the wool or cotton braid, then insert the braid inside the catheter; remove any excess of the wool and fix it just up to the tip of the catheter. Then coat the catheter with oil or butter and hen's egg yolk, place the patient on a seat, make them sit and empty their bladder by rubbing olive oil and water around their genitals; then gently insert the catheter into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then lift the penis up towards the anus; afterwards push the catheter just before reaching the bladder, and guide the urine to the thing empty. This is not done according to this order because whatever leads or follows is twisted; then pull the thread little by little out from the wool until all the urine comes with it, then press the urine and make sure the flow of urine. And repeat the process until the bladder is emptied, and properly guide the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	About diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction has assembled there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, if make all the tool which is called 'clepsydra', and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has three parts: two from one side and one from the other, as you see; and cut through this with medicine in such a way that it numbs well the member without addition, if possible to drain the moisture and then set when necessary; and when you see your medicines flowing into the bladder, place the head of the instrument into the moisture, and direct them towards the person administering; if you extract the moisture from the instrument, apply pressure on the one who is applying it immediately afterwards; if you do this while extracting the moisture with the instrument, then set firmly after that; if moisture enters during this process, comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of a subtle stone with which we catheterize the bladder: thus far.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it's made of silver or an archaut, and the shoulder is placed higher. And from one side up to the first rib where it meets; then take a sheep's bladder and place in it the moisture that you're going to catheterize the bladder with, then connect it between the two ribs forming a thick double thread, and heat this part of the moisture on fire; then insert the head of the catheter into the member, then pull your hand towards the bladder until all the moisture comes out, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder. And if you can't reach the bladder, take a piece of parchment paper, and make a circle, punch it roundly in the middle; then tie this thread firmly at these points, heat this part of the moisture on fire; then assemble the circle as you would assemble a loop, and put inside what you see, the moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; do it like how you did with the bladder, press with your hand until all the moisture is in the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have discussed in detail the methods of stone dismemberment and extraction together with medicines; we also spoke about the differences between stones that are small like raindrops and all their signs, and when to open large stones; and I will explain this clearly and briefly for you.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I state that stones which are small like raindrops in the bladder often occur in children, and this is a sign that an infection has jumped into the bladder similar to how it jumps through its delicacy; open the urethra, rub the painful areas of their penis, and let them urinate many times, then rest; and note these urinary jumps; and for a while after these jumps, the treatment of children is light until they are four years old, and becomes much more troublesome in the elderly, being in between childhood and age; and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by purging, in order to draw out all the toxins that are within the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And it clogs up every time when trying to cut into the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take hold of the patient by their limbs, and lift them up and move them backward, so that the stone drops down to beneath the bladder, and exits not from above; then have them sit between your hands, with their hands on their thighs, so that the bladder is fully sloping downwards; then try and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in space, now hurry to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if they do not defecate all the way with touching, moisten your index finger of the left hand, for if the patient is young, or your middle finger, if the patient is older in age; and press into its foundation, touch the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, remove it from the neck of the bladder; then press up onto your finger, and push outwards where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to stretch up the testicles with his right hand, and with his left hand hold the skin over the testicles at the part where you will make the cut; then push out the spermatic cord, of which this is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And cut between that which is between the coions and the foundation, not in the middle but at the edge of the left snowbank. And be straight on the stone, and your hands should touch or be close to the foundation, and make it of a round size going through so that it is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too big; by chance press if your hand is touching the foundation, then it will break easily without much effort. And know that there are parts of the stone where there are angles and edges: they get stuck in coming out; and at some parts which are under like a nut, resembling roundness, whose exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And in the places where there are angles and edges, make the size bigger; if it doesn't break, then it's necessary that you use the pincers which are like a file at their tip to force the stone so that it does not escape; or you can push underneath with a delicate curved instrument at its tip; and if you cannot devise this way, then make it slightly wider than your little finger, and if it breaks cleanly, then force it with vinegar; and if there are more stones, then break out the biggest at the neck of the bladder first, then cut upwards, then apply pressure downwards, and the smaller ones later if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if she is very large, one must tend her and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For these two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out immediately where the blood cannot coagulate; but always strive for a pull, or a break with tongs, as long as you can extract it piece by piece. And when you have accomplished your task, fill the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, then tighten, and pour oil and wine over it, or oil and rose water and cold water to soothe the inflamed area; then bind the patient up on his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you release the tension, make sure to lift it with oil and water well, then apply a diapering ointment and a basilicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if the abscess bursts in the wound and chemical corrosion happens, or clots form inside the bladder, and thus urine retention causes it to be known like this without a leap with urine: therefore, you must tend the wound, extract that blood, because if it remains, it corrodes the bladder and deteriorates; then cleanse the wound with water and soap and salt, and assist him in all ways you see fit until he is well. And when you treat him, you should tie both legs of the patient, and gather medicines on his body.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it's located where the penis leads, being stuck there, and urine cannot come out; if you treat as I am saying, that you cut many times, and excuse the cuts made by this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I already have this experience like this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron branch according to this shape, and have it fixed at three points on a stake:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the thread and tie it around the penis near the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then gently push the rod in the penis until it reaches the stone; and slowly twist the rod with your hand at the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from another side; if urine starts coming out, then press your hand on the part of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it breaks suddenly and urine starts flowing out, wash the area with water, and be careful to avoid further injury. If you can't do this for any reason, tie the thread around the stone and another one above it, then position the penis between these two threads right at the site of the stone, pull forcefully, then remove the threads and clean off the coagulated blood in the wound; and continue treatment until there's no longer bleeding.
de la piere des femmes	From the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens that stones are found in women's bodies, and if they occur once, it requires special care, and is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows how to reveal herself through tears, even when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third method is such that perhaps one cannot find a woman well versed in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone within the woman is more prominent than the stone within a man, because it must be cut deeper, causing great fear. And if necessity compels you to do so, then you should seek out someone very skilled indeed, place your hand on her stomach, and if you cannot find one, don't hesitate to consult with an expert; and present a woman knowledgeable about part of the art, instructing her to perform what you are asking regarding the inspection of the stone; and watch closely whether she is a virgin: then it's necessary for her to push her finger or base into the cavity and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, force it out from under her finger, and advise that she pushes her finger against the stone, and presses her left hand onto the bladder firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it is necessary for her to move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder until beneath, as far as possible before arriving at the root of the thigh; then cut in the area of the thigh against the middle of the knee, where the stones are likely to be found and felt. And feel the bone in that part; and do not move her hand above the bone or below it, and make the incision only at the first slight depth; then expand the rib in the incision, if you feel a bone increase the wound as much as possible until the bone can emerge forcefully, knowing that there are many types of stones: this is to say, small ones and large ones, rough and smooth, long and round, and some have rinds.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you understand the signs to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it doesn't hurt him, put sulfur on the wound and keep it there for an hour until the pain is gone; then return to your work as long as the stone can still be removed. Have with you the tools I have instructed you in removing stones at home to help you with your task; and if the pain doesn't subside, and what has been cut off was from an artery, put powder on the wound and wrap it tightly with strips of cloth or bandages, don't repeat this process again, leave the stone alone and do not squeeze it in case he dies. Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the limb is restored, then return to your work, while the stone remains hard.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Gelatinous mucus is nothing else but a gathering of moisture or white pus, which exists within the coat of the kidneys, that contains the egg; and it's called 'pus', and there isn't any proper time when it's properly in the membrane of the egg if one considers there to be another egg. And this is the skin under the kidney containing the white pus we've mentioned; and it doesn't have its own space no.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the creation of this gelatinous mucus comes from weakness that affects the kidneys, and spreads that substance.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never come due to percussion on the kidneys, and this moisture has many colors: or it's a color declining to jaundice, or without redness, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more; and these are signs to recognize this collection, for if they are or white pale as we said, then there is pus present, I do not know how long such that the kidneys remain intact, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper membrane, then there is pus with a part of the egg, and we think that it's another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the kidneys and the white pale, you can smell it well; therefore when you know the color of the moisture, test the entire inner square area for inflammation, as shown above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Following this then, who comes after the introduction, judge by what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient must be healed according to our ability and the replenishment of their body; then sit him forward on his back, slightly higher at one spot, and place cloths around him. Then sit him to the left side, and order the minister to sit right beside him, stretching his arm up towards one of his ribs under the curve of his kidneys; then take the hot iron, and cut out the skin underlings between him long until below the knife, and cut it all straight down from the kidney skin until reaching white fat, and gently burn it according to our skill; then pierce the fat flat with water fully deep enough, and drain out all the water, and then place his bones back in their places, stretching the fat up towards; and do not touch his kidneys but only the fat alone; cut everything or by pieces right down each rib area for him carefully, as if you don't cut it properly skillfully, water will return; and should the egg jump out from your work, then reset it back in its place once you have completed your task at this fat spot; then join the two layers of skin around the kidneys into one seam, then treat this wound as any other wound until he is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie up the vessels that are suspended, in case there's bleeding; then operate on the groin until under the suspension point, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said before.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the wound is divided into two parts together, know that these are two branches; so handle the other part as you did the first equally, then remove the blood, and apply greased wool soaked in rose oil to the wound; and place another piece of greased wool soaked in wine and oil over it, and put these on both ends, and cover them with double cloths, and bind them all according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and apply them with torn wool according to this resemblance, sewed together at the waist of the breeches. The first piece goes under the foundation up to the back, and the other one on the part near the knee; and another chief piece above each angle, then all assembled is tied in a loop at the waistband of the breeches. And with every single time, this cautery branch of fire is treated like its iron size, and you should take an exquisitely sharp cautery knife, cut the skin at the angles, heat it up as we have said before, so that the white substance containing the fluid is exposed; then take the cautery in accordance with this form, drill the white part on it, and scrape it with this fine fire knife until all is well-done.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And you apply the force in all ways that you can, until you thoroughly heal everything; and remember to ensure the fire does not touch the egg; know that this work heals more effectively; maintain care against bleeding out, and understand the workings of size. And if anything goes against your wishes, or pus emerges or bleeding off, or any other issue occurs, address whatever goes against you according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the body parts are filled with pus and can't wait for this operation because of its horror, then perform a puncture, as I instructed you. The moment you are fully sure based on the explanations we have provided that the watery part is in place, make the patient sit up; then pierce the abscess in the lower section right through to the flesh everywhere wide, and make the puncture long along the body; and let the hole be as wide as needed for fluid flow; after which put a piece of cotton on the surface, bind it well, and allow drainage of the fluid until the wound heals; then treat until the injury is fully cured. And if the white material doesn't let the pus escape through the mouth of the wound, you should use a feather or tool used to drain dropsy fluids as described previously in its form, widen the wound opening, knowing that the pus will return and gather together after about six months or more, and once it gathers like before, then this period passes for the body.
de l’aposteme des coions	regarding the abscesses of the kidneys
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in this part of the branch there is much fear in various situations, which I believe justifies leaving it alone; and I will tell you about its work and the characteristics of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	So, I will say that many abscesses come from horns or in animals; and this happens by chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	Here is what you need to know about the excess of sourness and fever which spreads in the blood or through percussion; and its color follows the color of the body. There is no pain associated with this and it is a pus-filled abscess. By chance, there might be a greasy and pebbly abscess with a discolored appearance, and it never comes from within an artery, nor swells veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it's due to the blood in an artery, you can recognize this by the location of pus during examination; if you press on it with your fingers. And you should not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those made from veined flesh are known by their disposition in expression upon touch of the fingers, and one can very well perform measurements based on this similarity, and on other materials; and that you take the knuckle's contour, then is the egg at the top, and the white thread comes with a yellow tip, and release the suspensory from all sides of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already joined with these materials when born, then it must be that you take out the egg and the head; and if it's yellow at the tip or within the veins, then it should be that you remove all of that tissue, and round off the head.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the beginning of life is behind or near the tail, it is necessary for you to grasp it completely and remove the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your operations are completed, apply greasy oil and rose water to the wound, then continue other treatments until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	regarding the abscesses of the kidneys
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is one type of abscess surrounded by a seeming layer like a ring, with the softening of the lumps, and the pain intensifies when they move; and the treatment for this illness must be as meticulous as that described earlier, yet we will also inform you about this issue according to what the old did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary for you to make the patient lie on the elevated stool seat. Then place them upside down over the bladder suspension device below their knees, at all the veins near the scrotum, and tie up the masters, and extend them symmetrically; then cut deeply along the veins as they are exposed, and then cauterize from each side, just like when extracting arteries that are in temples; then insert a needle with double thread, and attach it to the original place where the needle came out, and firmly connect it to another part; then cut straight down the middle according to the length of the body, and pull out any corrupted fluids; then treat the wound similarly as other wounds when using a bandage, so that no vein remains with fluid from either side; because this causes no harm, and if all veins have blood coming into them, it is necessary to tie up the sides to every vein; so that the scrotum does not lose its support due to cutting of the veins, they dry out and cannot help each other.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the uterus
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	Events of this nature occur due to the division that comes about in cases of rupture or stretching across the abdomen near the spleen area. As a result, the intestines descend through this opening into one of the kidneys; and this opening is either where rupture occurs or from stretching on it, and these II ways of causing things come about: by percussion, or jumping, or by squealing, or by lifting up grief inside, and by similar actions; and the signs when it's due to stretching near the rupture, are that they occur little by little over a long period, not suddenly; and the abscesses are equal until around the front part because the rupture pushes on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the symptoms are when it's due to the division of the syphilitic disease, causing a sudden pain at the beginning, and there appears pus in various forms near the skin, because of the release from the intestine and the body's response to the syphilis further down.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And the glands often descend with the intestine, and are retained within, causing great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron cures for fear, because one should avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	The method of performing this procedure involves commanding the patient to have them pull on their intestine with their hand inside the wound if it can be inserted; then wrap a bandage around their neck between your hands and lift their legs. Then raise their head up, stretch all the skin of the kidneys until it is long and stretch the rest of the abdominal cavity over the length. Stretch and bend the intestines to the waist according to necessity for opening the wound, making sure they can come out easily; then peel off the spleen's white part as much as possible until only its pale color remains exposed on all sides; then insert your index finger into the space next to the kidney, between the white part of the spleen under the egg skin, and between the second spleen, pushing aside the one behind the egg, and separating it from the second spleen. Then guide the white part of the spleen with your right hand inside the abdominal cavity, lift the white part of the spleen to the top of your left hand, and push the yolk sac towards the waist; command the attendant to stretch the yolk sac upwards high, freeing what's behind it from being bound together; check with both hands if there is any intestine or hard white part that might have been wrapped around something, and if you find nothing in these checks, place them on the stomach under. Then take a needle made of thick thread made of X filaments, and insert it into the back part of the spleen that's behind the skin of the kidneys; after the waist, then stretch out the white parts that appear from the threads until there are four of them; then join them together one above the other in a cross-shaped manner, bind the spleen well with this thick thread we've spoken of before, which is located under the abdominal skin. Binding tightly according to the first length of two fingers, and after these two bindings leave behind a space for the spleen that's under your waist about one finger wide; then continue binding as per the circularity that the egg carries; bind in the area underneath the abdominal skin until it doesn't slip or move like we've described earlier. Apply wet wool grease to oil, place it on wounds and apply the binding thread that we've mentioned above.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And once the white part of the belly mentioned has been incised, after the cut, by concern for bleeding, apply cautery.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and let the string until it heals itself; and if it takes long to heal, then immerse it in hot water, and place on it what we have said, until it heals; then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I never see anyone who dares to perform the iron treatment.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old ones said that it is done like a branch gathered together in a bundle, in such a way that you tie the vessels after gently cutting them off; then cut into halves, and treat the abscess of the one who works, until the vessels bleed; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No time comes rupture in the stomach, as we said, and open their mouths; and no part of the intestines comes out from their holes, and if any does come out, it's small, and repair happens every hour; and always, if he stays too long at this point, then the wound becomes infected or gangrene, until the intestine comes out; and this happens due to the extension of the gangrene which is in the stomach, as we said, for it's extended, then made soft and swollen by the intestines and opening; and treat it with cautery, as we have already said; and never treat it with iron in this way: and let the patient lie on his back between your hands, then cut out the inflated area of the rupture according to the size of three fingers; and then remove the gangrene under the skin that follows, then take the rib and place it over the apparent area of the gangrene; and press it to the fullness of the belly, then sew up the two appearing parts of the gangrene on the inside of the rib, and sew both sides; then remove the top part of the rib, and don't cover or stretch the gangrene or anything else as I have instructed you in treating the branch of intestinal wounds; then treat it by the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you handle the wounds, if it is cleansed and heals the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The umbilicus is constrained and does not show up in the incision, and the cauterization is practiced in this area, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin around the anus
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the anus becomes soft in some people, due to the softening of the contents inside and it is something to be seen; when you want to treat it, one should let the patient lie on their back, then take off the softened skin from the natural skin. Then join the two flaps together at a suture point, and if necessary, sew the excess softened skin in three or four sutures, or firmly in two. Then cut between the seams, and treat the wound like any other, until it heals, and then remove stitches from the skin that has been treated.
dou chastrement	with chastity
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You know that punishments are excused in our law, and because of this, I would prefer not to speak about them in this book; yet they are necessary only for two reasons: one being that the person who faces punishment should be able to respond when questioned about it, and how to cure it; and the other reason is that we often need to punish some animals to assist us, such as goats, sheep, cows, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	So I say that punishments are done in two ways: either by attraction or by making an incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the case of punishment by attraction, we would place the animal in hot water until their horns soften and are pliable. Then you would take them with your hand, until they recover and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For the castration procedure: it is necessary that you dye the animal and press its udder skin with your left hand, then tie the tourniquet, apply to each quarter with the soap when you have well scalded them; and leave no small orifice through which pus might escape, as well as any subtle orifice located on veins; and this manner of castration is milder than that done by traction because under traction there might accidentally remain some of the teats, so the animal desires lust. Then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Concerning hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism can occur in two ways among humans: one way is that between the two sexual organs they open as in the form of a woman's body, or having hair, and sometimes during intercourse they produce urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, having one at her crotch like a penis and two sexual organs.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for wounds and burns is that you apply all treated ointments, treating them just like other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine jumps off their skin of the thighs, if there's no need for treatment.
de la tentigene	Of the pustule
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Treating a genetic mutation on the natural part, as long as it's too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, this is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It's necessary that you remove the excess of the tentigene with your finger or a tool, and do it gently; don't cut too deeply so as not to bleed out, then treat it with another kind of remedy until it heals. And on another mutation that appears at the mouth of the male, and in the testicles, and perhaps from sudden force, and resembles a knot, and for this they called it the old 'knee disease'.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it's necessary that you do it, as we said about the cautery, treating her until she is healed.
de erratique	Of the cautery by fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	If uncertain as to the nature of the woman not being understood, or the disorder is slight; and naturally by birth, or accidents by disease that has come upon her; or it's due to physical weakness, or subtle or dense substances, and is done internally in the chest, or in the ribs, or beneath the breasts, or wherever it occurs; and consider conceiving and childbirth, and at random having flowers to bear; and knowing this requires observation of the symptoms.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the bruises are noticeable close by, consider them on your arms or at your ribs.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it's due to subtle syphilis, and the symptoms are close by at her breasts, hurry up and treat like this: place both of your fingertips together, and have the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs; then form both her breasts symmetrically, until the subtle syphilis is gone and covers the bruises. Then take wool and apply some grease to it, placing it on her breasts, and make the woman lie in this position every day, so that she won't heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the stone is hard and full-grown, it is necessary that you press upon its apparent form like a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is of new flesh, elevate it and apply a pressure; have at hand hemostatic medicines to stop bleeding, such as ginger root, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with plenty of egg; then administer a large mustard poultice so that the wound doesn't stick together; do this for a long time, then cover it with a linen tent; and until it heals completely, apply other treatments.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the arm there is flesh being born, if it should be treated according to this manner, provided that it's not abscesses that are causing the problem.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess in the arm that's causing trouble, one should not apply fire.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Wound openings are incisions in veins that without proper care, and when the wounds are old they become inflamed; and we have discussed similarities with these before, and their signs, and I will now talk about those that allow for healing.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I state that the emorroids and the inflammation when they occur internally in the anus, and are not noticeable to touch, except for their treatment with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those at the mouth of the anus can be felt and those that can be treated are these.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, it is necessary to put the woman in a cold house, then place her on the altar of tongs, and hang the clothes on her roots, then cover with powder of medicines that restrict blood, such as senna and dragon's blood and incense, and similar substances; then soak her feet for an hour, then put them in cold water; and if bleeding persists, make her take a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and gall and similar things, and then give her oat flour mixed with honey and garlic, and apply this plaster to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if he stops bleeding, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, have them apply suction cups to the back and breasts without causing injury; then take wool, and its moisture in the juice of plantain or the juice of agletier with old wine, and apply this to their skin.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, you clean the wound with oil until it is clean; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a hard head, if it needs to be covered as I have said for the therapy of thylul; and then you continue the cure until it is clean.
des apostemes de la marris	The abscesses of the womb
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscess come in the male body, such as gangrene and pearly abscesses and herpes and cysts and fistulas and hemorrhoids, and many other diseases that I mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, it is necessary for me to explain in this treatise the pus that comes from the ear, which is not among the abscesses that harden; and if you want to understand the workings of iron, observe whether the pus is warm at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	So don't hasten to pierce, but let the patient die until his pain is relieved; and then have him sit on the seat, with two small seats where he can lean, supporting himself against his back and assembling his feet towards the parts beyond the leg; and spread his arms out, place them under his knees, and bind them firmly with a good ligature; then move his gullet towards his right side, and bring the instrument to use on the ear from which pus comes, as explained hereafter, this is its form. It should be that when you see this instrument brought into play, you make your first cut in order to know the depth of the ear, so that what enters within the instrument does not go further than it should, and does not injure the patient; and if the instruments are larger, it should cover the depth of the ear with cloths, so that the instruments do not burden her; and it should place the funnel of the instrument above, and mark the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens, and one holds it with gentle hands, it is appropriate to cover the head, the neck's middle part; and when the wound has been drained, then you should place moistened wadding in the wound, either in oil rose or in dry green oil; put the wadding directly under the marrons' edge of the wound, and place a clean, moist wadding underneath on the scabbard blade, in water that has been boiled with allspice or thyme; then after two days of treatment with ointment following this method until it is healed; and each time lift the marrons and the wound by a dripping of water and honey, and then again with water mixed with cooked roots of lettuce and long arthritoga; then resume with the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound has healed in the marrons, you should refrain from heating with iron but instead treat it as we have instructed in the section about treatment.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The first skill one must have when giving birth is to understand the natural process of childbirth, and these are the signs: when you see a woman rushing in haste with a breathless intake of air, wanting to smell something: then the fetus begins to forcefully emerge; from this you can tell that the delivery follows its natural form, comes out from under her head, and is accompanied by its second half. And when you see these signs, it's appropriate to gently press on her belly, so that the fetus exits quickly; because as it descends through her head, it also comes out with its remnants in proper parturition; and anything else that doesn't follow this process does not occur naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes only from her joints and affects the body or the shoulders, or the hands; when it comes down through her abdomen, or ovaries, it is sometimes converted by chance near her neck, and by other ill-fated signs. It's necessary for a midwife to be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of mistakes and deception, and I will show you all the figures on how one should assist her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	When the child comes through its head by natural birthway, and the woman is in severe labor, and her strength is weak, she should be seated on a stool or held by women; then let her rise from this position where fenugreek was cooked, and then have the midwife place between her fingers the small spoon as shown below:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And cut the second [part], and remove to it his fingernail until all moisture inside is out; and compress her belly as long as the baby descends; if not, it is necessary to treat the woman with fennel seeds oiled by saffron; then have her drink and gargle with consilidum, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now give birth to the baby.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out completely, you should gently push them in one by one; and if they can't enter, place the woman on a chair and lift her feet upwards. Then pull the chair towards the ground, and cut the woman so that she doesn't urinate at this time; and if the hands cannot be inserted and the baby has died, you should prepare a knife as it was placed before, remove the child, and gently push the hands again in the same manner.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the birth of the child above its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes up to its feet, what it needs is to push upwards; and then twist little by little, until it becomes level; then bend its legs slightly and extend them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can it jump up to the thighs, if it commands to grab, and makes it snort with consideration; if it jumps further, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it doesn't agree as we have said, if you turn it gradually and gradually, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Because then make it slightly easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not jump like we have done, say take courage and oil of camphor, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; and apply this mixture inside and outside the woman's body, then make her sit in warm water until her back is covered; and when she is moistened all over, make her wear myrrh necklace, and place it on her, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on the stool, then make her snort and restrict her mouth and nose, and gently rub her stomach, because the child jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the position of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if you place your hands gently and slowly on it; then be attentive at its neck, and hang its legs down, and let it lie on its back; and bend its arms gently and slowly, and then take hold of its hands above its belly, and move its knees away until she is ready to deliver from below; and if the child doesn't jump, take its feet and shake vigorously, then move its head up towards its belly, then I put my hands in; and pull the child gently and slowly; and command the woman to breathe until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the birth of the child that comes out with a hand突出 during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It's necessary to engineer in bringing back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, make the woman stand up and walk; if she can't walk, make her sit on a bed and lift her legs; then apply the massage technique I've mentioned; and if there's no delivery, have her sit on a chair, and study how to bring back the hand; and turn the child according to its natural shape, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to breathe until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the birth of the child on its neck, it has spread its arms, and its face turned towards the back of its mother's.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that you massage the patient's hand, then gradually and little by little turn it, gently massaging her. When they are even, place her in a muscular position, as we said previously, and command that she move slowly. Once this has been done, make her sit down, and command her to pray; and have her cough after doing so.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner for everything in the second half
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When this method is fully applied to the entire second stage, if it has reached the heel of the finger, until all moisture is drained; and if there is pressure both on her belly and around her neck, then when she is in labor through her womb, do not let her be restrained, and cause harm to the child; then push the child inside until you have placed her correctly, and command that she pray once: then gently prod her.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an unusual occurrence, it just happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two things are removed, and do not live, if one does not know; I know this, that they multiply and are produced by the syphilis which devises them, which is bound to the blood; and none of them come out naturally like all under, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out painfully, as the treatment that we have described, and there is a subtle disease, make it quickly and gently what she does; and do this according to whatever tends towards healing.
de plusors enfans	Of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	They are never formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh month, and so on up to fifteen, but are all formed in the shape of a child according to the greatness of their growth. It is necessary that the womb know everything this, because something similar might happen; act accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman who is carrying a dead fetus or has a belly issue, as I have said in division, and if it does not come out, forcing your hands on it; it is necessary that you know whether she is of sound health, and does not have any symptoms of dying; it is necessary that the woman be supported on her back, and her shoulders inclined backwards, and her legs raised; then place the woman's head towards the bed or when she is lying down; afterward rub the woman's lips with moist almond oil mixed with thyme and fenugreek seeds and linseed. Then grease her hands with these oils and herbs; then gently put them back on her. Then take care that the fetus is equipped to descend through its head; if it gets stuck in her eyes, throat, mouth or palate, or near her beard, or in her collarbone or under her ribs, and if the descent occurs through the feet, place a knife in the middle of her body or on either side of the back. And you must pinch the nostril with your right hand, and place the thumb inside the fingers of your left hand, and gently apply this to all your hand, and insert the nostril into none of these places that we have said, until it reaches the empty thing; and this is the form of the nostril:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then find another small artery, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal; and then move them evenly from one side to the other, for blood to flow out, and make sure the arteries are jagged to hold the flow, as is shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, if it affects any of its nerves from which it's connected, and you heal the affected area, then keep that artery in place, and pull out the other part; and if there is nothing left to affect, then place this artery higher up or even put more arteries, and do this until all is removed completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes forward of the other, and it cannot be pulled back by squeezing, then you should wrap around this sleeve until it fully comes out; then cut in the joint at the sole or at the wrist, and similarly do this with the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is big and it is stuck out of the way, or it has a sharp point assembled together, then you must push the spinous spur between your fingers, and force the head off the sharp point; or you should take it to the tool called "almidach", from which the structure comes with the tools after this chapter; and thus do likewise for each child up to their natural large head; and then pull the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps out and is held back by force, as long as there's moisture or pus issuing; and if it can't issue, you should cut it piece by piece until you can; and if it swells in the belly or below the ribs, you must puncture it wherever the moisture runs.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if it sinks in his feet, it is a light condition, and the opening to the mouth of the mare's leg is also light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is stuck in the belly or udder, it should be extracted by stretching the skin hanging down on the hand; and make the belly or udder as long as there's moisture inside; and if any other member is osteitis and the head remains, then push your finger until it reaches the opening of the teat; then put in one or two fingers and pull them out; and if the opening of the teat has narrowed due to an abscess that came before, you should not try to force anything, instead administer moist and fatty things; and apply ointments, and soak a cloth in oily and moistening substances.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the baby is on its side when it's born, and you can make it level, then follow what we have said for live infants; and if there isn't permission to do that, then the midwife must separate it by parts, making sure not to leave anything from the second stage.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, follow what we have said for treatments in the presence of blood that comes out during intercourse; and if there is bleeding from wounds, then place it under water and restrain it, and apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman who had borne one child that died, then she gave birth to another from that same womb, and this other also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came in the belly, and swelled to such an extent that it opened, causing great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for treatment, and I waited for a long time, and could not tolerate the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong plaster, and out came a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised, for this stomach has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it must be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I want the wound, and guide my hands in surgery, as long as the woman is at her best condition; and keep the woman under constant care like this, and it would be a bit of time from her first to her second recovery. And I have remembered this chapter only for what, when the masters find an unusual thing, they should know how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the shoulder back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here comes the method of using the presser, which is described in the books; and for each two tornants (a type of joint) you have four ribs, totaling four joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Always, the horns should be more delicate than a restrainer, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth should be as wide as two-thirds of the body's length, and the edge of the leaves must match that, about one palm and half long; and in between these two pairs they have two joints each of this same rod, which are firm on both sides, from a half palm to slightly more than that; and those two joints are placed inside the grooves of the horn so as to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another version, in its likeness more delicate and lighter, should be made from the wood of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of the pincers; and at each shoulder place two joints, as you see, a palm long, and two fingers wide; and when you see the mouth open completely with the entire instrument, have the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging down and her legs spread apart, then place those two joints joined together in the mouth, hold the handle of the instrument between her buttocks; then work your hand over the entire instrument just like you would with the pincers, according to how wide you see the mouth of the worm open, until the worm discharges what she wishes.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is completely covered and multiplied by its appearances; and when you present them to the work, it becomes faster in execution and taller for their quantity towards people.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not exhaust the instrument that you have equipped, because its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained during childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold back her urine and then make her snort through consideration. And keep your hands on her mouth and nose; if she jumps because of this, it's well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If that doesn't work, take an apple, and put a cover or lid on it, then place herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, such as garlic, rue, anise, chamomile, cinnamon, and lavender; all these herbs, or any of them, be cooked or boiled in water over fire; then place a reed or lid under the pot, and the other end in the mare's mouth, and apply it until the vapors come inside the mare; then make her snort as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If it jumps at the second attempt quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this treatment, and does not become stronger, then command the servant to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or musk oil, and then return it to its natural state. And want the second one; and when she has found it, take it and gently extend it a little bit straighter, so that the marriage does not interfere with the extraction; but must move it lightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it comes out and relieves her condition.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the marriage's nose is bleeding profusely, we have said that the cure of sneezing and herb fumigation would be appropriate. And if she doesn't get better after all this, then you should refrain from pulling too vigorously; but it must be that whoever has their hand in the marriage's mouth ties it to the woman's abdomen, then applies tetrafarmacon ointment enema; if it will pass and she will regain her strength. But still, whenever she tries it, it brings bad smell to stomach and head, and burns the skin.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore it is necessary to use fumigations suitable for this: none of the old have proven that the fumigation of mustard and dried figs works.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumes a woman during retention of flowers and afterbirth is thus:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it seems as if one is seeing a reed, and you place the subtle head in nature, and the broad shoulders on fire; use smoke treatments over the coals, and the burn until she is exhausted, then repeat another.
de percier lou fondement	To puncture the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born without having a clear understanding, instead they are confused by a subtle misunderstanding: thus, in the game, let her recognize this misunderstanding according to its purpose, and do not allow it to be sharpened with excruciating pain, and guard the transition so that she does not touch it; then place on moist wool in wine and oil, then apply ointment treatment until it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it won't reoccur, put or insert a piece of poplar wood, and leave it in the person's mouth for days, and remove it when the child begins to walk around indoors.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And no time comes to these sudden injuries of an open wound or abscess; if that needs to be handled suddenly: if you treat it with the method we spoke of for the elm bark.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula from its base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas originating from the foundation are swelling and increase those that originate below or in the space of two parts, either for one fistula or multiple ones; and when this swelling is old and leaks out white or thin pus, and any time these fistulas are pale; they are recognized by whether there's loss of content or airiness whenever the patient expels something, and sometimes a sense of jumping in some areas.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And there are fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; they reach up to the joint of the knee, and up to the root of the testicles.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the sinus present at the bottom, and not present: and it is that you bend your index finger or base, and poke a subtle needle or spider pin into the sinus when there's no twist.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is twist, if you insert a subtle tentacle or a horse hair, as long as you feel the tentacle or hair on your finger; and if you don't feel it, and it doesn't produce congestion, lack of wind, or air as we've said: know that it hasn't pierced; so quickly treat accordingly.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is close enough to the bladder or where urine leads, if it jumps with urine and cannot be sealed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it has pierced up to the joint of the ankle, then the tentacle reaches to the top; if there is no twist and pain within, if it remains without an opening, it doesn't require medicine or immediate treatment through ointment; and for these present sinuses, there is no cure other than labor and the vanity of those who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the technique that is neither purely Persian nor ancient, there's hope for healing through iron, as I have proven, and it's that the patient lies on their back; and you lift their legs up to their buttocks, and bend their thighs towards their abdomen; then place a spider's web tent, or if twisted, use a tortuous one until you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain in their backside, then you should press your index finger into it. If you sense that the tent is piercing, then uncover where you feel between your fingers either a syphilitic sore or pus; thus you know she is Persian. If there's no movement and cannot be treated.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	We can still cure some completely, but this happens rarely. And when assistance is given, one heats the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was mentioned; and you apply it all hot into the fistula until it comes out from under the ground; and do this twice or three times, until you know that these pus-filled tentacles have been burned, which resemble a bird's feather. And then treat with moistened cloth in butter, until that pus passes, then treat with ointment on the wound and suture it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healthy, then indeed.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If he is thus, no other health can be. And if you try it outwards, and doesn't penetrate up to the root which is or the foundation, and inside your finger and under the tent a thick covering of flesh or syfac, and you see the fistula at that which comes through the covering deep within; when the operation begins on the fistula, and goes in before the tent, and then apply the cautery after, up to where it reaches the top of the tent; and frees the tent, and discharges; then cleanse those flesh walls that seem like a bird's feather pen, and leave none remaining.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not heal, cut between you and the organ, then apply fire or an ointment to treat it.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauteries make two good things: namely, burning of these flesh-covered areas, and bleeding and drying out due to moisture; then treat moist tents with butter or ground substances, until the oily exudate is removed, and the burned flesh falls off in the oil. Then heal wounds from stubborn, hard tissue that remains, using dried medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	And when it has been restored, if it is healed and does not recur.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes just short of the full bottom, and is removed from the body, you should tap on its base or bottom, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tentacle, and within II is the mesh or syphilitic ulcer, or it's about to pierce, if there's no other way out than through engagement and hope, by applying one of the three methods: or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it down to the bone, or if you can, put in stitches and set the wound; do not proceed too far beyond your knowledge, so that you don't cut into the holding structure, allowing for natural evacuation through this method; then treat it accordingly; sometimes it will heal. Or you remove that covering and clean it out after having cut from beneath the base, or by probing or with another instrument aimed at the point; then cleanse the wound thoroughly as much as possible; then study how to restore the wound, and keep the fistula open in the lower part below the base: if it's a lighter matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And no time are fistulas according to this manner: and when you pierce the tent in the fistula, and it is or lies at the base of the skin above, take a tent pierced through the head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And tie one twisted thread in a knot, and pinch the tent throughout the whole length of the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is Persian in the margin of the base within, then extract that thread from that torn one, just as you pierce your needle or foundation; and pull the head with the thread, and unite the two pieces together, and join them to each other, and let it for one or two days; and restrain it no more until the threads cover these structures that are between the two, and weave through; then heal the wound until it is sealed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not burst, make an incision in all ways that you can, as long as it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not fitting to do so by laying the patient flat immediately, and then treating them, as we have said, until they are stabilized.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spiny spatula used to make the fistula is very delicate and has two aspects: and cutting; and on another side no, because either you cover what you should not or you do not cover what you should, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of lacerations
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	The illnesses occur in two ways: when they are inside the bone, like pieces of resin, and there can be small ones or large ones, and if they accumulate blood, and if there is one or more, and they're outside the bone and close to its base; but those that are outside have little moisture, and still contain a bit of yellow water or some blood near their core, and appear with a flesh color; and the treatment for those inside the bone involves advising the patient to move around in chambers until the bones release them, allowing filaments to be seen; if you rush it, use tongs or hold it by your nail, then pinch its roots; and if an incision doesn't keep them from slipping due to moisture, grab them at their base, or with cotton, or a piece of camel wool; remove them with your fingers, then pinch them out further. Then apply hot powders that replace the cautery; you treat them as advised in the chapter on the fire cautery if they are healthy; and if the bone doesn't release them, use emollient castor oil for washing what is inside the base if it can be done openly; until the patient feels better when moving their body parts, this treatment will then seem easier; you should grab them by your nail or tongs, pinch them out, then treat them as we have described till they recover and fear no further surgery.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary for you to sew according to this method: take twisted thread, and insert it into a needle, then pull the thread through from one side and pierce the needle from another part, turn both ends of the thread around the needle twice, making sure there is enough space; afterwards, tie off the thread tightly, then cut the looped end, remove the needle, repeat this for all others, leaving some to drain out excess blood. Then place a moistened bandage soaked in rose oil or ointment on top of it and apply pressure. Command the patient to rest until the bleeding stops; when they are no longer bleeding, administer medication and further treatment until they recover fully.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	By drying heat or the base.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times, there is dryness of bile in the intestines, and due to nature's constraint, and when the illness is old and medicine no longer helps.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you scrape at the tip of a splinter or on your nail with the outer skin which does not allow for moisture; then treat until it becomes firm as required; and if it cannot become firm, restart the scraping more vigorously than before, until it starts to heal and peels off; then treat until it fully recovers.
dou fremit	with tremor
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formice is a small apparent infestation beneath the skin, and it travels throughout properly; and once the vein has frozen, and one feels it also like death shaking, and comes to all over the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take a stick made from a goose feather or a very strong vulture feather, and place that stick on the shaking sensation until the purple circle covers all the shaking completely; then turn your hand over so the entire stick is touching the shaking until you encompass it fully, and press it down firmly, and extract the shaking from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit, do this with a twig of an araign or iron according to this shape, and make it subtle underneath and taut above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce it, for you must hold onto the two ends and apply pressure. And if you see fit, cauterize the trembling (area), as is shown or described in the chapter about cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the bladder's structure
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never use an argentin or archaut bladder, or one made of melted silver or lead; and never use small or large utensils depending on who they are for.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those utensils should be used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, as they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the bladder is either small or large, just like this:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and if the belly is bound tightness or pain, as you see, and the head penetrates inside; let there be two holes on one side of it and one on the other; place medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment in this condition under the belly, letting the hole go all around through tiny slits, with each slit having about an inch of space between them. Then, insert one strong thread made of spun silk twisted into an 'X' or 'Q' shape inside each slit and stitch it together as if it were a goat; when the medicine is inside, tie it tightly with another strong thread in front of the instrument, then perform the enema; this forms a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and smear the head with oil or egg yolk or something similar on its face, then gently rub it. Then the doctor instructs his two helpers to hold his hands together, until all is visible, then remove the cyst, and lift the patient's legs at the surface, and if the medicine wants to come out, pull it as much as possible; and if he sleeps a whole night, this gives more substantial aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer it during a colicky disease of the stomach, and the medicine rushes to escape, then repeat it as long as he is well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhage is from the root or base, or an abscess, then even a cyst as delicate as for a child; and this is the form of a delicate cyst where the skin is compressed:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have spoken about the treatment of wounds in our division; now we will speak about treatments for hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various depending on how they are made, and where the wounds are made, and why they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The causes of injuries are through stone, the size of a sword or knife, or a lance or shaft or axe, or similar things; or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as an injury near the neck, or on the head, or chest, or belly, or liver, and other body parts. And I will tell you how to treat each wound, starting with simple injuries on the head, for memory will guide me in this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound appears or bone is not broken, be careful if it's due to stone or similar things and the skin has been completely torn off, leaving large wounds. If you slightly doubt the presence of pus in those cases: if there's a little bleeding from the wound as soon as I clean the skull area itself, then treat that part normally instead; and encourage the patient to drink wine and eat fatty foods richly, as they help in healing.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if they don't want to be treated surgically, reduce their meat intake and avoid drinking wine or eating large portions of meat. Instead, apply a moistened cotton in oil rose water, or in stictch wine only on the wound. If there is no pus present, apply it on fresh wounds where blood has just started flowing but hasn't been disturbed by air; then use the powder I will explain later. And if it's already been disturbed by air, apply some ointments until they heal completely.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a cut from a sword and similar injuries, and the edges cannot be brought together by sutures, then join them with stitches, as I will say for abdominal wounds, regarding suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound exposes bone, and blood, and only holds for a little while when supported; then treat the wound with medicine, and replace tough flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as roasted testicles and cooked wheat, as well as similar items.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find or discover that the skin has decayed, and it doesn't reach to the bone, then cut out all the decay, and let out pus, and then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without doubt, and it cannot be stopped with medicines, then tie the artery, and if you find that it's dislocated, then secure it with a thread; and if this doesn't prove beneficial, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if the wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should put this powder which joins together like that when the heat of the fire has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way to use the powder is like this: take one part of frankincense; dragon's blood two parts; living charcoal three parts, and finely ground it all into a powder, then apply it to the wound, and press it firmly until it well aerates and joins with its own blood thoroughly; and then bind it tightly, leaving it undisturbed if it doesn't swell; for you remove the medicine only when it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one should only perform this bloodletting procedure once, not just because of the need for charcoal or dragon's blood, but when the surgeon has cleaned the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the heart has healed the wound, even in that state, indeed do not apply this powder to it at all; but apply some digestible ointments or oat flour mixed with water and honey until it starts to heal. Then continue other treatments until it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, then use delicate forceps to extract them; and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound in the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	This injury comes from the neck, it is simple if there's no distinction between the neck and the head itself, but if the nerves in the neck or an artery has been severed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it's the nerves, there is no other tool than to leave the treatment alone and not put anything restrictive on it, as this harms the nerves and causes them to withdraw; and don't apply anything cold to the wound because nerve substance is cold and continues with the brain which is in one of the highest members; but use gentle medicine like diluted rose water mixed with oil, and wash leaves also in mild water, and other earthy minerals done similarly, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, one should bend the edges and let it heal until it is clean.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, pierce them or start lower. If an artery is cut, and blood flows out, then expose it, repair it, and cauterize as needed; and if the spine of the throat, or ribs, or passage way is injured, guard it where the meat goes through, if you place the rib above the collarbone, without touching the throat but keep it according to its natural shape; and afterwards let him rest for some days, then cure it with dried herbs until it heals. And if the wound has made an impression in the bone, remove it; and if there are pieces of bone, take those you can out, leave what you cannot reach until the wound discharges pus, dries up and clears the result; and if the wound is fresh, use a powder that I have said for that purpose.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and it has a sinus, treat it as described in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	From the wound caused by a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it's a spear or knife wound and the injury is deep, when you inspect the wound look for wind blowing out from it: if that happens, know the injury is fatal. And if it isn't deep and is still bleeding freely throughout its entirety, don't apply powder immediately or bind it straightaway because the blood wouldn't have time to clot properly causing leakage to heart and worsening of illness. Instead, apply an attractive ointment, binding twice a day. If you don't have an ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture and let the patient rest on the wound for 3 days or more; if no spasms occur, there will be no harmful heart tremors either. And when you notice good improvements, then know that the injury is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat then with other remedies as long as it is clean; and if it cannot be cleansed and healed, observe that there is a fistula; if the treatment proceeds as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is due to a sword or knife cut, and it's simple, or worse, or on the back, then follow the treatment of what lies in front; if it's large, use sewing; and if small, apply powder; and if it's deep into the bone, and there are splinters, if you treat the wound and remove all foreign objects; and if they're not removed, leave the wound to heal naturally, to aid in extractions; and for other wounds on other members, make judgments as we have stated.
dou derrompement dou ventre	about the rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Laparotomies are large, medium, and small; from a major wound there might be any number of times the intestines or parts of the intestines come out, through which foreign objects enter. And sewing is more difficult, and never surpasses a minor wound compared to a major one, because when you attempt to reintroduce the intestines, they do not go in as far, for they swell whenever they feel cold; therefore, it's better to treat smaller wounds, so that we can properly reintroduce the intestines in their place. And know that the rupture of the abdomen occurs in four ways: The two common stitches occur during the laparotomy of the abdomen, and the stitches of other body injuries and two other specific stitches are common with other wounds; yet all these are more suitable with the laparotomy stitches, and I will explain each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestines has been exposed, and it's easy to replace what's injured, this can be done through one of two methods: either by taking advantage of the size of the wound as we have explained or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: wet a sponge or immerse half of a linen cloth in just water, or you can boil it with vinegar and cypress and needles, and immerse the intestine until the warmth expands; and after doing these things repeatedly, let it cool to help reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or boiled and seasoned (cooked) broth, because through this it becomes easier to enter with little else; and if it cannot enter, make a small incision on the tool that one uses for empyting urine; and your first treatment is cooled so that the cut remains, as we do not cut without great necessity; and these are the tools to split: if you cut inside at the curve and outside non, then visualize this shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, if you can place it back according to its natural form in its proper location, do so, for this is worth trying.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is extensive, and it's located on the lower abdomen, you should have the patient lie with their back towards the sky, and place their legs higher than their head. And if it's in the part below the belly, then position their head and buttocks higher than the abdominal parts; similarly, when dealing with a wound at one of the two parts of the abdomen, ensure that the lower section is above the other. In this manner, you should carry out what I say about large and smaller wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use whatever you are equipped with; then take hold of all the edges of the wound and gather them in your hands, and bind all along the tear with thread, then stitch them together; this is the common way of suturing. You should choose a needle or needles, depending on the size of the wound's width; leave about half an inch from the edge of the wound before you begin stitching; place the needle where it suits you, using sturdy thread, and pierce through both layers of skin with the thread; then pierce through both layers of flesh inside the skin until you've reached that part, stitch together the two ends of the flesh in three places; then sew a double strand of thread around each end of the needle, then stitch along the edges of the wound, leaving about half an inch between each stitch; then sew a second stitch following the same process as the first one; and keep doing this until all of the wound is stitched up; choose needles that are neither too fine nor too thick; because very fine needles can cut through the flesh, while overly large ones don't fit well into it: you should choose middling-sized needles. Don't stitch them too close to the skin or the leather where they might cut open the wound before suturing. Then smooth out the ends of the needles so they won't irritate the patient at night; and cover them with cloth or bandages while keeping the stitches in place until the wound has healed completely; this method of stitching with needles is more practical for small wounds as you can use one needle for two consecutive stitches, commonly, where you gather together both layers of skin and both layers of flesh in one needle when it's followed by a sturdy thread midway. When you have pierced all four ends together, pull the needle back to where you started, doing this like tying knots; leave about half an inch between each stitch; this stitching heals the body, and I stitched a wound once on someone whose belly was torn open with a knife, which was more than a palm wide, and contained intestines that were also several palms long, and it was within the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned his intestines when they had been away for twenty-four hours and the wound was healed up to fifteen days. I treated him and he became well.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And when they thought he would die, it was a miracle; and I didn't treat him with any ointment. I was in the area where one couldn't find oil or any medicine, so I used no medicines. Instead, I put old cotton twice a day on his wound and washed it with honey water until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two proper methods of sewing: take the needle and place it from the outer side until it enters within; when it pierces straight through the flesh, sew along where you have inserted the needle or where it has pierced, and then make another piercing from the inner side to the outer side. The principle of this sewing is that you stitch like a marten furs, leaving one end free on one side and then picking up again on the other, until the entire seam is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suture, as Gallienius correctly states, is like what no one does, which unites the two parts naturally together, and places one tip of thread near to the other tip, in this manner: make a needle or thread akin to a thorn pierce only that part, then leave the two tips on the thread; then turn the needle, and have it pierce through from underneath to inside under both tips, at the points where the two tips are. Then have the needle pierce each of them from underneath to inside through other two threads akin to a thorn belonging to the opposite side; and this is the standard method of suture and most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galiens said this word, and no one attests to it, that we should stitch the abdomen with two needles, or there be thread in each; and you must push one needle from one side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew corroies. And know that when the wound is halfway through the belly, this stitch feels heavier than any others on his or her belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are such as those of other wounds: and that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, just like when the surgeon has cleaned it out, place everything back in its proper position, then apply a poultice. If the surgeon has already cleaned out the wound, apply nothing else until the wound begins to heal; clean with string, sew up the sutures and stitches, and care for the wound as you would others until it heals completely; if you have no medicines, when it starts to heal, use old cotton, then stir it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you need no other medicine for many kinds of wounds; and if you suspect that the wound might lead to infection in major parts of the body, then it is necessary for you to soak light woolen bandages in oil heated with heat or rose oil, and place them between the joints, and remove them from behind. And when there is pain or gangrene at the edges, which happens often, then catheterize with black wine, and similarly if gangrene reaches up to the intestines; and pierce inside, and know that for large intestines it heals more easily than small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is named 'young' cannot heal when it is injured, and this is due to the obstruction of veins that are present there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the approach of its nature towards nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the liver jumps out of the wound, then reset it back in the same way as an intestine when it's fresh; and if it is old and turned to a reddish or black color, it is necessary that you tie up the part which is black so that no blood flows from there because there are veins and arteries. Then cut off what lies between this tie-off point, and hang both ends under the area of the wound until outside beyond for easing the extraction when the liver stops bleeding, and then treat the wound.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the bladder
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, one can try to restore it in certain ways, because I have seen that someone was pierced by a lance or had stomach wounds; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, became ulcerated and turned into an fistula, with its waste product emission and gaseous passage; I treated it according to what I could manage, and continued to refine until it healed properly, and sewed up the intestines.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it join, I doubted that the patient might have pain in his stomach; and there was no harm, but remained in better conditions, eating and drinking; and reported to any experimenters that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in this manner: take large-tusked oxen, then bring together the edges of the wound. And when the oxen's mouth has opened, put them on the two edges, if she forces her mouth upwards; and then close the head, and it stays so that it cannot be released, then place another ox after in this manner as before, until the entire wound is covered; and thus keep the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	For the ones who get inflamed in the intestine, and there is no harm to the patient, they can tie the intestine with a delicate thread cut from an animal's intestine, like this: take the tip of that intestine thread which has become quite thin, then tie it onto another thread made of fine linen, then thread the needle with this thread and sew the intestine, then set the wound stitches while pulling them tight; and this way of sewing with oxen is only according to the path of hope and expectation; and if there's a large and broad wound, especially when it's in one of the intestinal loops, as long as no obstruction or damage exists, because of its intricacy.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula, or where it might be.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, as it matures, is universally termed 'fistula', and similarly when it becomes covered with hair and hardens.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the true nodulation that becomes hard and white, or one does not feel pain, and it also grows hair like a bird's feather; and sometimes it is clear and hollow inside, and at other times thick; sometimes small, and at other times quite large; and I have spoken about this in the division of wounds, that any wound that isn't healed, and there is no pus, leaves only through one of the eight causes: namely, due to the smallness of blood or pus; or because of its malevolence; or because there is hard pus inside and on the skin, which does not allow pus to form; or there is too much bone; or the flesh is rotten, and the material has a bad quality; or the medicine used in treatment was poor; or due to the manner in which corruption resembles pestilence; or due to the property of digestion being slow, leading to delayed health, and expelled naturally; or there are veins or bones present: and I have already shown all these causes, and their signs, and treatments with medicine, within this division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistula, which is performed by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body. For there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, either at the base or inside organs like stomachs, bladders, or any part of the torso, back spine, or within joints of hands or feet; and if they affect the primary function of a limb's main structure and resemble it.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas of this kind are problematic for healing. There is no other reason but ignorance; if there exists any fistula that does not reach to where I have said and you attempt its cure, and you perceive it clearly, use an arachnid or iron tent, if the fistula is straight then use it; if the fistula is twisted, use a subtle plumb line instead because plumbs bend along the twists. If you cannot find the exact location of the twisted fistula by using tents, then catheterize through one of its twisted parts, for moisture spreads from one twist to another; and cleanse afterwards, and carefully remove any bone or nerve that might be there, asking the patient about their pain when you press with your hand. Note where they feel it; and once you truly know the location, if not in relation to a joint, a nerve, an artery, a vein, or anywhere else I've mentioned, follow what I have instructed: remove the pus and rotten matter inside; then cure until it is healed. If the fistula is deeply embedded straight through, make your cut as deep as possible, then use moistened tents in medicine juice and apply them up to the head of the fistula until the medicine dissolves the remaining excesses; then cover with healing ointment for as long as it takes to heal completely. If not healed by this method, cauterize as we have described before, if the bone has been corrupted by the fistula, remove it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve is injured and the main limbs are harmed, as we have said; and if an os (bone) is exposed, and there's decay and darkness, you should operate until all decay has been removed. Then cleanse with antiseptic things until it's healed; and if it hasn't healed, proceed again as before. Know that this procedure only goes so far: keep uncovering and cleaning until you reach the bottom, removing all decay; then restore the bone; and if it is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not so, know that the corruption is too deep, you cannot bring it forward; should there be no other option but to leave it to nature. And if there's a small corrupted bone, and you can extract it with tongs, take it out with an appropriate instrument suitable for this task. If there are many bones, extract them all, do not leave any one of them. And if moisture is against your will, and there is no fear or danger, then fight with the moisture, and remove flesh, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something to promote putrefaction on the wound instead. Leave it until the muscles have completely rotted inside the bones. Then they will disintegrate more easily. If it's a large bone like from a leg or thigh, only let decay occur as long as all of that part is rotten. Then heal the wound. And if there is much putrefied matter reaching up to the bone; you should remove and cover everything up to the point of decay, then treat until it heals over. And I will tell you about a case where an abscess appeared in a man's leg from which you can take example and help for your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man in his XXXth year, who had pain in his leg due to something originating inside the body that spread until it reached the leg. There emerged a large abscess, and there wasn't any reason for opening it outwardly; but surgeons operating by their folly opened far enough so that the pus was released through them, and they ate away much of the tissues, turning into a fistula, and there came off an immense amount of pus that made the whole body swell with heat and body fluids. And many doctors kept treating him for II years, and none knew anything about the art of surgery until I was summoned, examined his leg and the medicines used to treat it, and what ate away through the open wounds extensively. It turned the parts of the body red from youthfulness, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these depressions, and then searched all the depressions, finding that some came against each other from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hurriedly did so and found one of the depressions where I discovered a part of the bone. I found that it was corrupted and pitted, and the corruption reached inside the bone; it appeared to me that there was no other corruption than what I removed; then I began to heal the wound with medicine for a long time, but could not stitch it together; and then I continued, discovering the bone as before, finding that the corruption had continued in the bone, which I discovered, and then removed it. I aimed to stitch up the wound, but I only stitched together within a palm of the bone, and pulled it back to its full length, then replastered it with medicine; and it healed quickly and was sewn together, and did not need to be restarted for the operation, due to his weakness from illness and fear of death that I had.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For in the case of blood loss, it often happens, but was completely cured. Bone grew instead at its place, and it had a hard texture, with good disposition and no harm or adverse effect from all sides, neither outward nor inward.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, should this happen: take hold and pull at the end of the bone that is open, and command that it be extended upwards; then tie another piece of larger cloth than the first one you took, and tie it around the flesh which is inside the bone, stretching the ends, so as to pull out the rotten flesh underneath, revealing the flesh on the surface where you want to heal, ensuring not to injure the flesh; place a stick or board under the bone to cover over the rotten flesh; do the healing several times until the corruption can be seen and felt, and heal again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone has been corrupted and does not open, and if the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, remove all the flesh. Then put the charcoal nearby, then let the corruption extend from one side to another, and keep the corruption for as long as you can, just like what we've said; and if the corruption is at the joint, cut through the corrupted joint, and expose the bone on the other side; and if the corruption is in the connection of two joints, there should be no angle except that which should be cut; and if the corruption is either one of the hand’s fingers or foot’s toes, it becomes very hard but still you must investigate this corrosion according to how it opens. Clean up all ways possible from this process without opposing the vein or nerve; know that the incision and instruments for cutting these bones are many depending on the shape and appearance of the bone, its size and subtlety, its grandeur and smallness, and its hardness; so each form of operation should have its instrument according to their likeness; know also that practice will show you the tool you need based on knowledge of this art, and testimony from various diseases' presentations; indeed, if you think about what tool is needed according to how it suits.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The joints suffer either due to internal causes or external ones; and when you have treated that corrosion with medicine therapy and found no improvement, it is necessary to cover that limb up until the point where the corrosion occurs, so that the maladies escape via this death or through malice which is greater than the fault of the limb; and signs are such that limbs turn black, as if scorched by fire, and after turning black, since the corruption spreads from member to member, it takes over everywhere in the body. If you rush to cover it up, and if it's due to the impact of some venomous animal like a sea scorpion or snake and such, when corrosion is on the head of the two legs, then cover it up, and don't give it space till reaching the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes up to the hand, when you cover the joint, so that corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, when you cut at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, then it's death, and beyond this there is no remedy than its dose in strength; and thus do as follows whenever the corrosion appears or passes: If it comes to the first joint, after covering another joint; and if it passes through any part, then cover every part; and if it ascends into the leg, then cut at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other option than letting the patient die from; and the manner of covering or keeping the limb is such that you tie it up both over and under, extend one band below each of these bands, and another band upwards on the other side, and cut away the flesh between the two bands to a slit wide enough for bone visibility until the bone is exposed; then cover or sew, and place one linen wrap from each part, so that the linen does not touch the healthy area, causing further injury and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs while you are working, cauterize the wound immediately, or apply some arresting powders; then return to your medicine until it's completed. Then bind the injured limb with an appropriate bandage and treat until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to this person: they had a pain that seemed like fire burning, and this corrosion started in their foot first, completely consuming the foot as long as it lasted. And when the person saw the corrosion coming, they attempted to chop off their foot and became healed. It took them quite some time after that for another corrosion to appear under their hand, then he came to me, and I applied things that amplify the body's reaction after purifying the body, but couldn't stop the corrosion. He insisted that I cut his hand instead because he was so desperate. But I didn't agree as I hoped to stimulate the body's response; I also feared if I chopped off their hand they would die due to poor bodily virtue. He was completely hopeless and returned to his land, attempted to chop off his hand, and became healed. I am only recounting this for those needing such knowledge.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No abscesses occur within the inner flesh and linger for so long that it creates a large clot of blood; afterwards they swell and puncture, and in them the blood moves, leaving the limbs swollen, like vessels. And the skin above is also as thin as delicately woven fabric, and does not stretch up to the bone or nerve, and such disease is named 'sain', and is not called 'fistula'. But if it extends so far that it reaches all the way through to the bone from inside, then it's called a 'fistula'. And the skin being like this means you can pinch that skin throughout completely, even when it's thin like delicately woven fabric; and it does not blister due to its putrefaction.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have married the skin to heat, and the corruption is not at its end, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat the urinary system like this: observe if the breasts are large, and the bladder within them smells putrid, thus cleanse it with Egyptian medicine as follows: take ash, oil, and bismuth in equal amounts, heat them together in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; then adjust the dosage according to your need, mix it with water or honey, and clean out the breast, hold back its excrement; let the medicine sit for two hours before squeezing it out; do this several times until the breasts are thoroughly cleansed, and the pus is removed. And if you have no Egyptian medicine available but possess ashes from a vine wood, pour water over them, then strain it and cleanse with that instead; or if even water and honey fail to cleanse it, use a mixture of water and wine that has the property of cleaning and washing away; and when you've done this and determined that the breasts are well cleansed, cleanse them using medicine and ointments whose properties I have described or written about in treatments for ointments; if the opening of your rectum is small and the tip of the stick cannot enter it, widen it slightly with a heated iron tool and apply an Egyptian ointment tent until it fits comfortably. If the wound is too wide, simply allow a thin layer of the Egyptian or basilicon ointment to cover it, as long as this allows the stick to fit in; if pus is present above and inside your rectum, cover it with an iron tool only slightly lower than its position.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowe is in place, one should not let it be injured by flesh; and if you cannot cover over the breast all at once as you see fit, then prepare things in such a way that the bowe runs to the lowest part of its own, because when the bowe is in place, one should not let it be injured by flesh and if you cannot cover over the breast all at once as you see fit, then prepare things in this manner: so that the bowe runs smoothly downwards, and leave nothing from the bowe; and take medicines for consolidation to put under the clean surface, and rest on the linen sheet that covers all of the clean area; then cover around the damaged part of the breast only slightly wider than the first, place ointment with sulfur on the other sheet according to the size of the damage, and lay it on top of the damage to ease the bowe, and remove none of the large sheet until after many days once; and that which is under the damage part of the breast, often removes to take out the bowe, and know what comes from the bowe, whether it's poison or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or no change, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a manner that you see the nature that jumps up on the damage part of the clean surface, then know that the chest is already healed, and approaches health; and then release the wound in the morning, or the third day, and when you release the wound, change to another sheet, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if after many days the stomach discharges an undigested substance, know that the sickness is not cured.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle veins cut after a long time, do not despair of recovery, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are individuals who take a long time to heal in their wounds, and those who do the opposite; and if indigestion occurs after several days inside one's chest, know that your heart is not well. And if the heart takes a long time to warm up and is far off, adjust dry and moist medicines by substance and virtue, such as ointment diafinit, because there is a large part of vitriol, this is the last medicine; take ointment diafinit, and mix it with rose oil, then apply it with old equal wine by substance; then cook it and use it. And do the same thing for cooked honey that thickens, when ointment diafinit is not present or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them, add it to the honey which burns on fire, then apply this mixture as a paste onto the chest, and don't stop administering an aristologist longe, and roots of celestial lily, which is also like wheat flour and centauri; and use simple or compound remedies: grind them, make into powder, mix it with the honey that I have mentioned, and use it. And if treatment lasts a long time and does not improve with this cure, know that corruption has occurred and made an impression in the bone, or in hard members, or in tissues; so when treating fistulas as we said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess under the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that originates under the nail of the hand's little finger or foot, or by chance occurs in other toes; and when it ages, if no care is taken, then pus spreads, flows and runs like water as long as they reach the root of the nail, sometimes even fully reaching it. And corrosion goes till bone, until there comes painful smell, causing swelling around both sides and changing color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have instructed in the division, and if the treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary for you to remove all that has remained of the nail. Then, after that, cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is intact. If the nail is pushing into the flesh, starts to poke through, and becomes inflamed, then it's necessary to place the rod under the nail where the flesh begins, raise it at the top, remove that subtle and gentle layer of flesh, and apply hot and corrosive medicines on top of the flesh to remove everything. Then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corruption is in the bone, you must cut and forcefully remove it, because as much of the bone that's corrupted, it cannot heal. And if you see the doo become corrupted, you must cut it out exactly how we've explained before, then treat until it's healed; and if it is hardened and bony, and it feels intense pain, it's necessary to make it heal first; then trim the nail from the spume in your cutting diagonally upwards, and be careful not to cut through to the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, place something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the painful throb of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	You must adjust what is born in the hands of some individuals unexpectedly thick, and sometimes it has parts or even bones, and none of them have nails, and none are born at the root of the joints, or the birth is in no way connected to ours.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those born without any bones do not move, and those born at the bone joint, perhaps do move; the size of the one who is well fleshed out so is light in this way: cut it down to its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	The bone that starts at the root of the joint is problematic to cure: hold onto it gently with your fingers.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or should be behind the bone, it is necessary for you to first cut up to the roundness until the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable tool at this point, and then treat it as long as it remains healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together are born or they are suddenly wounded by injury, or by the application of fire, or through similar actions.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it's necessary to cut that seam, so that it should be repaired according to its natural forms; then place between two moistened cloths or strips of oiled fabric, so they don't stick together. Or you place between two pieces of finely split wood, until the seams are joined, as is fitting.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When we are fusing any of its digits with the palm, if you fuse that seam as it should be.
des vils	of the vile
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Vices are thick veins filled with melancholic excesses that come from multiple members of the body. More occur in legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then for you to administer once a purge of gallstone, and then heal it by basilisk.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron treatment follows two ways: one is that you cut them and draw out black blood; and the other way is that you open the vein and pull it all out with force.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The process involves: first, with a hot water source vigorously treat the leg until thick veins become thin, then hold the leg against the malady just above the knee up to the part below the thigh; next cut the vein once or twice, at a wide size, then pull out the black blood forcefully through your hand from one end to another until such time that as much blood as the malady can bear comes out; and then reapply it and instruct him to eat cooked meat with this black color; and start evacuation and cleansing when veins are full, which is harmful to the malady.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment involves this method: raise the leg at the affected site. If there are hairs, then immerse it in water. And elevate the leg in hot water until it turns red and the veins swell. If you don't have a bath, instead heat it on fire and then place it over the vein from end to knee or near the ankle; then peel the skin at once, and burn each side of the vein until visibility is gained upon touch; and when it appears red and black, and as if it enters the skin like a white string; then cut out the vein from within, until it reaches the skin, then place it gently over the needle. Then cut again elsewhere above three inches; then peel off the skin on both sides of the vein till visibility is gained, then lift up the fire, just as done before, and place it another inch away. Then peel off the skin covering the vein till visibility is gained, then raise it with the fire, doing this as before, and place it another inch away, similarly to first; then cut again in different sizes or multiple times if needed, then lift it up, and cut with a knife from bottom to top, then pull and lift until second size; then stretch it one size after another till all strength is released, then raise. And if you can't pull and lift, instead insert a thick needle into the vein thread of both, tie it together and pull in, and cut out inside, then twist your hand from side to side until it's done; and see that it doesn't get stuck, for if stuck, cannot be pulled or lifted causing harm to the patient. And when you have treated it all, place wet wool in wine and olive oil over the wound area; and continue treatment till it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the body is twisted and bent in one piece, and it's not straight, as we have said, then you should cut it forcefully but do not sever it. And handle it as we explained previously.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one cuts the tooth is curved, and does not slice through but cuts without severing it; and has large curvature. For if it were subtle, it would cut through the vein, but since it's large as we have said, this is its form:
de la voinne civile	from the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is located in the legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil without moisture; and sometimes it appears elsewhere than on the legs, this happens due to corruption that comes from beneath the skin, just like when it occurs within the body of snakes and worms, causing decay between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the symptoms of the onset of this vein are such that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then the blood changes, and the vein begins to protrude, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And when the shoulder has been opened, it must be that you wrap inside with a piece of leather about three-quarters to two-thirds, and tie it, leaving the leather hanging on the leg. And every time there is a need for more, if you cover again with the leather and tie it; and if it's too long, if you cut off a part, cover it back up, and don't trim its root until it's fully out. For if you cut it, it enters into flesh, brings on pus and decay or necrosis in the vicinity, and worsens illness. And for this thing, it must be treated little by little till completion, without leaving anything out; and there is no time when this vein after being treated to five palms long, or ten, and a hand more than me, which was from ten palms long, that when you cover it, if it lasts one or two days, then pierce it until the bottom so all discharges, and empty the contents within, and apply antiseptic medicines for several days, then proceed to cure as for abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never at this vein with cold hands, and equally when it opens in the joint of the foot, or of the foot, where a lot of loss occurs, and where there are cold hands; so then treat accordingly as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	The verses that spring up between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This illness is called in our land "cattle disease", because it often afflicts cows, and it's a small worm that grows between the skin and muscle, and travels throughout the body, up and down. You can feel its presence from member to member until it reaches the skin where it was going, causing pain; and it is infested with putrefaction from various fluids, such as worms, snakes, maggots and roundworms in the stomach; one cannot determine its severity, because when it travels through the body, and goes up to the head, and arrives at the eye, by chance enters, destroys the eye; this happens frequently.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being treated and drained, one can only say when it is going: henceforth then you must tie the arm up above and below with a strong rope tightly bound, then cut upwards, force treatment, and if there is not enough fluid in the wound, if it needs to be cauterized with fire, until it stops bleeding; and the greater nuisances it causes are when they flow into the eye, as we have said. And if you see it coming or head close to the eye, then bind tightly under it the eyelid formation, cut upwards, force treatment; and it is necessary to use the aid of purification of body with medicines that dissolve for the evils of humors released, and beware of eating diseased meat causing corruption.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	The pain which comes from wind congestion
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it's a pain that occurs in any limbs, and spreads from limb to limb; I have seen what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to treat a woman who felt ill, and she showed me her arm, where I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm. And shortly after, I saw it rise up as if a worm was climbing towards her shoulder, quicker than anything else, just like quick silver when cut from one thing to another; the pain left that place, and settled into her shoulder, then soon spread throughout her body, until it reached her other arm; afterwards she told me that it twisted inside her body, just as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was marveling greatly how she moved from member to member in such a way, for I had never witnessed this disease in such manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	In any case, I wanted to mention that many wish for the pain in one place to move to another, but I did not want it like what I saw in the woman; and I thought it was due to her hot body, with exposed veins, and due to this constraint, the wind's pressure becomes apparent; and none perceive according to this reason among those who are delicious, and have moist bodies and restored veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to treat this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens up as we have said, do this: press it immediately above and below quickly, then press until the wind pressure leaving the body; and cauterize the body; and if you don't see it at your fingers, treat the one who debouts the wind pressure, such as stinking pills, pills of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and the location of their impact on the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity among them is that some have large points, and small ones, and those that are hooked, or soldered together; and there are arrows with two angles, and others with tongues, and those that have pieces; and this kind defecates in any member according to two manners: either in a primary body part like the head, as for example the brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, or similar parts.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it comes to the shoulder, in no part of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appear: so it is necessary that you be prepared for the removal of this arrow, because death follows in various stages; and when this ill sign does not appear and the arrow has not been fully removed, then remove it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow penetrates and punctures the bone, and jumps over a certain distance that is above the brain, is when blindness and deafness occur together with dizziness and fever, and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and reddening of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the intellect, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it lacks strength from the nostrils or ears; and sometimes it loses speech and voice; and a white moist flow coming out from the wound that resembles pus, and also burns like burnt meat; and if these signs appear, then take them seriously and remove the arrow if it isn't already.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the wart when it shrinks or changes into a heart shape indicates that it is close to the left breast. It also feels like being stuck in something solid, not empty; and sometimes the wart behaves like a pulse, with black blood coming out, and coldness, sweat, and fainting: know without doubt that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that never pierces is that bubbles do not jump out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face changes color, and they sigh loudly with coldness.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow stops in the thigh's covering, it pierces the small bones; and causes great pain and severe suffering and sighing; and moves all limbs from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow stops in or near the stomach, by chance it jumps out of the wound with any undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow stops in or near the stomach or abdomen, and it jumps out without any meat passing through the intestine, there is no hope for treatment, nor for extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow stops in the bladder, and the urine jumps out, causing severe pain for the patient: you should know that this wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the arms and the neck and the throat and the shoulder blade and the auxiliary (shoulder) bone and the spine in the back and the ribcage and the hip bones and the legs, and resembling limbs, are protected according to many arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it's not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because when you do something else.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to one house where an arrow had struck him in the neck at the base of his nose: I tried it and pulled it out from the other side under the ear fat, and found no difficulty.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And pulled out an arrow from a game that had struck him in the ear fat under the paper skin, and the arrow was still inside, unable to reach anything but its tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow length without any weight loss; the game was found easy, and it caused no harm.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And extract an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and it was the Arabic arrow in the ears: I would pull out the stubble hairs, and with as much subtlety as possible while pulling it, made the Christian whole again.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And extract an arrow from his home, which was stuck in the chest or belly, and I thought he would die; but after having passed thirty days, if it didn't change its position; I cut into the arrow, removed it, and then pulled it out without any bad incident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see the home to which an arrow has fallen or landed on its back, and found the wound healed from within; and remained the arrow inside it, without altering its natural positions, nor caused harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And there's another man who was hit by an arrow on his face and had the wound stitched up; and ever since he has suffered great pain; and many others like this.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And he was struck by an arrow at the home of princes' king, who had it stuck in his nose and was slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrow was completely stuck. I was summoned for treatment after it stayed there for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound to be very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I tried everything with a subtle technique and did not feel it; and there was pain and discomfort around his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I placed a healing plaster on his left side that was absorbing and digestive because his ears were not inflamed; and revealed the arrow's position in the ear.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the dressing to his hands on that day, and healed the wound quickly. He then stayed in bed for a long time after, until he felt the arrow inside his nose for one full day; and I told him this.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I placed corrosive mercury medicine on the wound daily until it opened, then tried it and felt the tip of the arrow as it emerged from its place; after that I adjusted in the opening of the wound with this corrosive mercury medicine, until the head of the arrow became visibly evident to me. The ends remained closed for about four months, but eventually the wound healed so well that I could use forceps and operate on both sides, unable to pull them out; then I continued to refine and invent ways of instruments, until I successfully used forceps made properly in one day, as described in this section at the end of the chapter. After that, when I handled the wound with these forceps according to its form, it healed completely without any issues.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And they judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it then, and if the wound is sealed, and if the patient recovers completely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I told you about the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that when you apply your treatment to what I don't mention, because books can't encompass everything; but the wise masters compare on quite a few small things, and on what is present and lacking, find new works, and new instruments, for the removal of foreign matters which occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows penetrate members where they are inserted according to two manners: either through their side or they enter; and if it enters or goes in when it's pierced from its side, this is an arrow entering into its flesh, and it never occurs now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it doesn't jump now, let it be until the char remains intact internally, and the issue appears; similarly, if it is stuck in bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for a few days, removing each day; then it will jump. If it doesn't jump, poke through entirely with a fine needle until the tendons are enlarged internally, and then remove them.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if an arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and reaches up to one of the brain's cavities, or any other incident as I've described to the patient: do not remove it immediately, but leave it until it becomes even after a few days, because if the arrow comes up to the sinus, it means death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is only stuck in the bone and does not reach up to the sinus, and the patient remains well for any number of days without any bad incident, then prepare for removal.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it's firmly stuck in that way and cannot come out by itself, then you should apply arrows internally, as I have told you; then treat the wound until it heals properly.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is returned to its original position within the body so that it cannot be seen by touch alone, take care in examining every part of it; and if you feel it with your hand without any suitable instrument at hand; and if you cannot reach due to the size of the wound or depth of the arrow and there are no bones, nerves or veins present, cut as wide as necessary so that you can pull out the arrow. If you can grab a part of the shaft when pulling the arrow, remove the flesh around it until it falls off cleanly, then bend or break the ears of the arrow as much as possible to allow easier removal; and be careful not to break the arrow but rather pull it out more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it in one attempt, until the shoulder is properly aligned within its socket, then move it. For the extraction process is made easy.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding prevents you from doing as we have advised in treating it in this chapter, then follow what has been said about treatment; and guard against cutting near nerves or vessels, and position yourself so that with care you can remove the arrow without risk, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to how they were before the arrow hit them, because that is the best way; if you cannot do this, then have them positioned as indicated by their symptoms show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from the other side, or if it exposes something from it, or if there is an swelling in the place where you can see or feel it distinctly: then cut upwards as high as your scissors can take hold, and then press: if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it's held in the bone, twist your hand round as long as it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then pull.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it doesn't want to come out, leave it still and start the extraction again until it does; and if there is an arrow inside her, push it all along; and if she's at the tip of the arrow, once you have administered pushing, if you administer the tool with a point, so that the arrow's point goes into the handle of the tool; and then push forcefully, and if the arrow is caught by the tool, when administering the tool to the point entering, in order to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is encased, it is necessary for you to hold all the flesh around where I am entering or have entered, if possible, then treat the wound as is proper.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow hits the hand or arm or stomach or bladder or ribs and is close by, you can cover it up if possible; and make sure not to cover the vein and nerves. Then extract it, then suture the wound when necessary; and treat until the wound heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pincers used for extracting arrows resemble an eagle's beak, and here is how it looks:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in various sizes: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead resembles the feathers of a bird, like it is pointed at the tip of the arrow, as shown below:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the pliers to use for pressing and extracting is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of veins similar to those common ones
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins through which we bleed, from which are sixteen heads: namely, two small ones behind the ears, called "hair veins"; and the two arteries in the two visible temples; and two veins that are within the eyelids of the two eyes, known as "sucking veins"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is on the head near the nose; and the two jugulars located at the neck; and the two veins above the mouth in the lips, these are known as "lip veins"; and two veins under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are commonly treated are in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, and it is found on the left side of the body, and people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called 'fascial', composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein if it's on the right or left side of the body, and people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the ulna, and this is the one that is treated, which clearly opens externally on the stomach.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The salve table is the vein that's between the index finger and the ring finger, and it has two layers; and in the leg, there are three veins: one is below the bend of the wrist on the left side of the body, and the second is sophene which is at the ankle on the right side of the body; and the vein that's called "ness", that's in the ankle on the other side. In the other leg, there are three veins under these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	Surgical treatments for veins located behind the ears were conducted by ancient cathar surgeons and also to relieve migraine; understanding the qualities of a surgeon as I have explained, concerning this, you should feel under your head where the maladies exist, rub it or the vein area with one harsh cloth; then tighten the malady's neck into a twist until each two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent from the head: then press on and when you feel the pulse underneath your head, indicate to them; then take the lancet and hold the blade at the vein down towards the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards, cut through it carefully and the skin as two inches wide, and make blood come out until you see it; then pull and tie it tightly till it heals; and I have already discussed the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The treatment of the two arteries located in two temples, if it is ancient and stable, as well as to the use of old remedies for eye diseases; and the quality of a surgeon should be such as I describe: and that the patient restrains his neck until both vessels are clearly visible; and feels the pulse on your right, then raises your head slightly; then press your hand over the artery near your right index, and hold the lancet there, then raise the artery upwards near you, and seal it, in the same way as with other arteries, and follow the bleeding according to necessity; then release the patient, place your thumb on the artery for an hour, then put cotton on top; and after that form the bandage and leave it until it heals completely. And we have spoken about their extraction and operation, or where this book starts.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The treatment of the vein above the forehead is as valuable as that of the cephalic vein in diseases affecting the face, and for migraines, and for redness; and the quality is such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears. Then take the tool called a 'distributor', which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another object, allowing blood to flow according to the amount you see; then untwist for the patient his neck, and tie the vein as long as it remains healthy and there is no risk of a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	For any vein, it is not proper for the flames to be too close or large; and the healthy tissue should run across rather than down, because the bone is near, and by chance the flames could break when they are delicate.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The treatment for the two veins located in the eyes and nose, as well as redness, and ear inflammation within the ear, and diseases affecting the face; and the quality of their treatment is that the patient twists his neck due to some cause, as described before. Then treat them, and make the vein short, a bit longer than the flame slightly wide, for there is no meat involved.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is thin, perchance it breaks; then make it correspond to blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The treatment for nosebleeds from the head area involves using water and salt, as well as various remedies for face illnesses like migraine and fever that come with it, and especially when the face is old; and the quality of this treatment consists in forcing your nostrils up by squeezing them with your left hand, then taking a long fine flame, and inserting it between the two nasal cavities, because the nose does not open well, and now the blood will start to flow; do not allow too much heat, adjust the bleeding gently according to your need, then let it rest for a night as it is quickly restored; this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The treatment for the two joints helps in tightening of ligaments, and in starting to mix things together, and many illnesses, and measles, and corrosion, and herpes, and swollen glands; where this treatment works is forcing the muscles from both sides when they are around the neck, as we have mentioned; and let the doctors be on top of the patient's head and the muscles lying at each other's location, then treat the vein long a bit widely, then drain the blood gently or according to need; then do another round in the other vein, then loosen the tie, and squeeze the veins moderately so they don't strangle; and leave them until morning for the wound to heal.
de la sainie des leivres	On the healing of the wounds
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The surgery for veins above affects the mouth and causes gum decay, and cuts in lips, and nosebleeds and inner cheeks.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of healing is to have the sick person face you, and hold their neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left. You can distinguish them by their being black, and because inside they contain thin black veins: cut both of them and if you don't know them and are in doubt, cut the larger of each part, and do the same for the two veins above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	On healing from beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Healing of the veins that are beneath the tongue is aided after the healing of the head vein, and this happens at the constriction of the throat, and for eye diseases, and for mouth illnesses; and the quality of the surgeon is that the patient's body is under their hands in front of the sun, they lift the tongue, and look underneath on each side there is a black vein: heal both of them, and don't go too far into it, because beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the arm that are commonly treated have two ways for healing: or they take all to be seared with a broad flame mirthin, or with an olive-flavored subtle one like the edge of knives, and are called 'anesil'; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame is greatly esteemed, and it appears wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And you need to open the veins filled with large, visible blood, and that contain large blood and disturbance; this is in the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle and pointed; for it aids in cleansing the fine veins or has delicate yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The treatment of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are in the throat, and around the collarbone, and in the chest, and in the stomach; it is necessary for the surgeon to treat carefully, and he must be aware of the artery which is there.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it touches the artery, and bleeding occurs, should it be stopped, as I have said; and must not be burned by the flame, but cut like before.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open clearly, you should remove it and use another one. Or if you do not want any part of it, or to cut into his body instead of him while keeping the hand's vein: It opens clearly; Cut at the flame beforehand as we said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you understand the location of the sainie, it should be that way when you extract the arm, touching the area until you can feel the pulse; then mark the area on the inside, and then tie the arm, and cut into the vein with the flame beforehand; and guard against cutting the artery when you see the area swell, for this is the artery: listen afterwards.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it sticking up as high as a child's urine stream, and the veins are red and subtle, you should know that this is from an artery: so hurry, place your finger for some time then remove it when the bleeding stops, just as many times happens; hold the arm still, and leave him alone, don't move the patient at all until they're alright; be cautious, and don't move them until they are sound.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the bleeding is not stopped, and it takes time, and the medicine is unavailable for you, if you must open an artery when it appears, because the head of the wound retreats; stop the bleeding on the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a bark of ginger, and cut it, then take one half and bind well up to the other side; if the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, treat as we have said, with powders that stop blood loss; and for the minor treatment of wounds, and the strength in holding the arm steady, these bandaging methods are not greatly varied due to the small size of the wound, and the power in keeping the arm still.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The treatment of the vein among its parts heals blood from the head above and the heart below because it consists of the basilica and cephalic components as we have mentioned, and requires that the healer be aware of the nerve nearby, and if he doesn't go far enough down, and finds the nerve, and swells and the health is damaged, possibly leading to inability to heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it doesn't open in any individuals due to its intricacy, then you should treat its origin with the instrument; and avoid touching the nerve using your strength.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The healing of the cephalic part assists in blood removal from the head and helps with the veins; it is appropriate for a healer to use the olive oil flame or the mint oil flame as these are the safest of all veins, because they have neither nearby nerves nor arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Always aim for the lightest option, and don't be discouraged if it needs to be done twice; and sometimes swell some limbs in certain individuals when doing it the first time, but there is no harm in that.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of treatment depends on your thought or consideration.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you need to know about hygiene is that it is managed solely for the purpose of maintaining health and avoiding future illnesses; and one should perform hygiene in any of the three arteries: namely, cephalic (head), faste (lower body) and basilic (arm); and one should wash at the beginning of prayers on your knees, in autumn and after winter meals when signs of fullness appear; and you should wash on the first or third day, after two hours or up to three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Hygiene against diseases does not have a fixed time, but only when the need arises during the day or after meals, at any hour and in all circumstances; it is not advisable to wash children up to 14 years old, nor pregnant women until seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	No one who has surpassed sixty years of age should undergo surgery.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone seeks to heal themselves, in whatever manner that might be, it is necessary for them to purge their intestines with a light cathartic if they have held back food, so that the veins do not draw excesses from the intestines that harm the main limbs; nor will one recover someone who has been too overfed by meat or drunkenness, until such time as they are strong and unill. If there is a warning about healing after colic pain, vomiting, abdominal cramping, frequent urination, or labor pains, as well as staying awake and fasting, and the like, then it is to refine blood and help heal from below the third part of the backside; then avoid work, pinching, excesses, and similar activities. And be restrained and joyful, have healing higher than that which heals you, rub your wrists twice or three times, then pinch your tie somewhat from above because if it's too tight or loose, it can't correct the intestines. And then rub their limbs with a bit of old olive oil, then place your left hand's finger on the vein under your back for a little where you wish to heal, so that the vein does not burn and fail at being pricked.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that behave like strings when heated, and there are some that are full of windiness, so that when one places them over the flame, they retract from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus belong to those kinds; and if it causes the vein to inflame, then the wound is too narrow, because in such cases the surgeons should be knowledgeable about these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it's good; and if not, it should be tried again slightly near that place or on the skin quickly, when the limbs are not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limbs are swollen and the patient feels hot and feverish, let him rest for one or two days and do not bind his arm: perhaps an abscess will appear; don't bathe or immerse him afterwards, then begin to bleed again as he wishes. And if the wound is small, or if the artery is so thin that you doubt it doesn't bleed as much as you see, pierce it right through in that same spot with all the flame; and make a quick incision, just until the limbs swell up; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the limb is inflamed, do not cease from the treatment and place a little of oil on it. Because oil alleviates the body's pain due to blood flow, and makes one moist in this region where the oil lies; hence administer the oil's application with each treatment you provide for veins, to stop the course of blood; and similarly, apply thyme and garlic juice, when you put them on the limb; if the smell becomes too strong it evaporates.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess, which happens many times, just like when it isn't treated until that moment or because the opening of the vein is small in other cases, act quickly and place a wet sponge on the limb dipped in hot water and a little vinegar for an hour; you should do this after the bleeding stops from the vein. And if it remains in the limb for several days without any blackness or greenness, it does not harm it; and if you see anything, put on something made of myrrh or aloes that has been reduced to a calamus juice, or a similar substance.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Many times there would be pus and appearance at the site of the basilica: so then place your hand on it, and if you find the area soft to the pressure of the hand, this is the sign of an ill condition.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hear then that you should not apply anything of what we have said, for by chance on the artery; but let him wear one damp plaster until it hardens the area, then treat with another treatment, until he is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And direct each person's blood according to the amount of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the sweat is black, let it drain until it turns red; and if you see that it's large, let it continue until it becomes fine; and if it's too hot, allow it to cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for the one who is strong and healthy, needing extraction of blood, that they make a larger wound, and have wide burns. And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and this pleases the healer to do it slightly and often, and they must heal in cutting diagonally, not straight on; and this method of healing prevents bleeding and nerve congestion, and yields better results than long and not wide cuts.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for the one who needs food in the healing process, they should give them a liquid made from grenadine. If the person is flushed, they can consume blood three or four times. And if the person has a cold complexion, they should eat something fragrant before the healing process; this could be liquid made with Grenadine syrup or aromatic honey with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves. The syrup should be well fragrant.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it fails in the surgery, after a bit of blood has drained out, it should inhale broth from flesh and a delicate aromatic syrup, and make use of other things that we have discussed in the chapter on syncope for evacuating veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to breathe in his arm and heal again, should it be necessary, when he is weakened by extensive healing, that he heals little by little, according to the amount of his strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if one wants to breathe deeply in his arm after the first healing, and they have much strength, then they should heal seven hours after the first healing, or after the new hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wants to be healed on another side, it must be healed on the second day or on the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there's much blood inside the body which is now heated up, and it brings on fever; so one should drain large quantities of it, and widen the vein until pus comes out. After you have fulfilled all conditions for treatment, place your hand over his pulse when he gets well, to prevent the bite from coming back after the pus has gone away; this happens many times when the surgeons are careless; and it is not right when you see that both arms have been released, and blood has come out a second time, and the vein is closed; press firmly on that area. Or if his hands have become swollen, he should stretch out his arm quickly, for doing so would be wrong, but leave him until his body is released from the first fever; then put your finger at the tip of the flame, waiting until the pus which has been frozen in the vein comes out and then place a patch of dry sand on it, pressing lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has swollen, let it be without pressing it, until the abscess is relieved.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if the need is to draw out blood a second time, let it heal at its original location, or in another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein runs along the arm in its place of the neck due to the fact that it is composed there.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of healing is that you immerse your hand in hot water until the veins become red. Then tie it moderately, so that the blood can be seen clearly, then heal through now not wide nor long; and make them wide at the ends, and well heal close to the joint of the hand, and if there isn't enough space for this, immerse your hand in hot water again, let the blood flow in the water until you have enough; and if it's cold weather, don't rebathe the hand in hot water, as you would keep it warmer indoors than outdoors; and healing through this vein is safer than with all other veins, there being neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The healing for the salvation of the right hand is against all diseases of the liver, and this is how it's done: tie your hand, and immerse it in hot water until you can see the veins, if they are visible; and if you heal it from side to side, and if you cover it completely without causing any discomfort; and don't overheat too much because the nerves are all bare of flesh, and then reimmerse the hand in hot water if it's frozen in the wound, and if you can't leave it there.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, place on the vein where it is cut and seal it quickly, and do so with each case.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The treatment for illness in the left hand is akin to that of mice sickness, and do everything as I've instructed you for the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The health of the spleen is useful for all diseases that are within the body, such as illnesses of the maris (stomach), retention of flowers (referring to indigestion or stomach congestion), and diseases of the kidneys, thighs, and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its health is such that the patient should be dipped in hot water and rubbed over the veins until they disappear, and bind it on top of the ankle joint; and the vein will be at the ankle, and above the foot goes somewhat into the kidneys; then heal it where it's larger or wider than the ankle, or at the ankle itself, because that works.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal over the foot, watch for the nerves that are nearby, and heal from across in a similar manner to stitching; let the flames cool afterwards.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot be removed, place the foot in water and allow the vein to drain properly.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if it needs to be treated for the first time, then try it again a bit higher the second time because the legs are salty; do not doubt about nerve damage, as we have said, and similarly perform on the other leg in the same way.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The leg of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle bone on the side (right), and its pain corresponds to the ache in the hip when it's due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its healing is that the patient dips inside or over a bath, and strengthens it above the ankle with three turns in twisting, because otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, you heal it in all ways that you can, and across; and it's worth turning as you carry it, for the limbs are free, and it is very responsive to manual handling.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you cannot find it, heal any hole that opens or on the foot, and turn toward your little toe, and watch out for nerves; and do whatever correction with the blood that you see, then undo the knot, and put cotton and tighten it over it; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of suction healings
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horns, or spiders, or leeches; and blood extraction is done in two ways: by piercing and drawing out blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction process which can cause injury is done in two ways: either without any fire or with it; and the suction performed by causing injury and extraction of blood happens at fourteen places on the body, of which one is entirely under the head; and another is under the neck; and two others are each side of the neck; and the suction below the chin; and the suction over the shoulders; and the suction over the pimples; and the suction under both arms; and the suction over both legs; and the suction over both ankles; and the suction does not treat blood, as it is from small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and because of this, it does not weaken any, as in blood-healing procedures; and it should not be administered to any disease caused by congestion, until all organs have been emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if suction is required due to diseases or customarily, we should perform it every hour at the beginning of each month, or at its end, and throughout all times; because there are those who, when they need to suck, are burdened with a head ailment; and those who find fullness and color in their face, and on their head, and neck, and in their ears; and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, have escaped the tongue, and cough out blood; and there are those who worry and see by dark blood and nosesbleeds and deaths and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and indeed even during the month, we instruct to suck after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The treatment of the ear aids in the relief of head pain... which comes with the ears, and it should not be that this happens after the removal of everything from the body; and this suction is part of the treatment for head disease, and it should not apply to those who are of cold complexion or have catarrh, as this causes them great harm; and for these, it should not apply that they use it, nor those who have or suffer from cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And the one who uses it frequently becomes forgetful; thus, because of this, it is necessary to place the suction cup somewhat further down due to the forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation in the neck is located in the region of the head's artery and basilic vein, and thus it benefits from compression at the wrist, and incision along the channel under the heart, and generally, and for repletion; and one should press lightly, because if held too firmly, it may cause paralysis or stomach problems and heart issues.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	Ventilation of the second costal cartilage in the neck relieves head pain and eye inflammation as well as earache, and is located by the region of the basilic vein; it requires you to instruct the surgeon to place his hand when doing so without compressing the artery or seeing a sudden onset of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilation around the chin relieves diseases of the mouth, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that affect the mouth; it is in the area for cleaning the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The wind movements of the shoulders correspond to illness that comes from heat and filling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Ventilation of the ribs is as effective as the three main veins in the arm, for it drains blood from those large veins; instruct the surgeon not to press too hard around the collarbone, because the muscles are bare underneath, and sensitive to nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction device on the back is effective against hemorrhoids from the bottom and various diseases nearby. It is necessary for the suction device to be large and made of iron so that it can handle treatment well; if by chance, they were slender, they would break; I cause great injuries doing this work.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg suction cups cleanse effectively because they attract blood from the entire body, and are useful against old pains in the kidneys, bladder, and uterus, and help heal ulcers; they are located at the two shins and ankles, and later weaken the body after long use, causing weakness in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you should place it first in a state of being empty, and apply steady sucking pressure, and position it quickly, moving it evenly, and keep doing this until you see the area turn red and swell up, then stop when you perceive the color of blood; then remove it, and reapply the suction cups, and take care regarding the disposition of the body parts. Indeed, there are some with thick skin and clear pores: for these, it suffices to pierce once, and create wide wounds, with a bit of depth; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the clot is large, it's necessary to puncture twice: once to delicately clear out the larger blood clot.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the clot is very thick, it's necessary to puncture three times; and when we wish to delicately drain some blood at a time, then we should only puncture once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we fear little blood loss, we often resume it; and if the patient lacks strength, we make them strong, and their endings are such that their pulses are pierced suddenly. It is fitting for those who have thick skin and toughness, and who have endured long periods, to grease their limbs with suck-out oil: in case of bluish spots, violet oil or sweet almond oil, or oil from the seeds of cucumber; and if it's yellowish, cress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile, or similar oils.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take thyme oil, or balsam, or fir tree oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person is healthy with a tending for flesh and large pores, it does not suit to apply oil but after suction they should wash with rose water, or cold water, or hawthorn water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar substances.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And this person who has some moisture, if they use myrtle water or sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large excesses should be raised with old wine or water from a spring, or decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar substances; and they cannot be treated by suction cup before the bath or in the bath, but rather after the bath for one hour or two. And do not allow them to sleep immediately after suction therapy, and it should be decided when they need to be suctioned and when they are suctioned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And take care of those who are being treated and are of a choleric constitution, if their disposition is too hot and inflamed; it should be that they eat cold things, such as apples, endives, lettuces, and similar items, and consume small portions, and pork, and beef, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with a cold complexion should drink honey syrup and half of an aromatic wine that's between old and new, and eat small portions, and consume small pieces of meat and young birds and pigeon; on the day they are to be suctioned, they should drink more than they eat. It is suitable for some to give them once or twice before or after suction therapy to strengthen their main body parts; make the stomach subtle but it's not suitable for those who are hot to drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are used to cause injury are those placed on the liver and stomach, and in podagre, and on the belly and anus and kidneys and hip. For this member cannot bear injury over wounds, and one does not do it forcefully only to draw blood from limb to limb, as we place them around nipples when a child is born; to remove the viscosity that is within limbs, as we place suction cups around the belly and anus for reducing limb size; and removes pain where there's obstruction or stone, and by its attractive virtue unexpectedly removes obstruction, or empties the stone from its place; and thus it operates when placed on liver and stomach when there's retained excessive air, and these suction cups are administered empty to suck only that; and never are they administered together with fire, and never filled with hot water as in such illnesses due to pleurisy, and in this manner one fills the suction cup with hot water or water where herbs useful for the ailment have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup used for fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And have two fingers of length half a palm each side, and at its middle has one edge on the inner part halfway I slightly blunt, as for driving in a nail, it should be in front if it does not hurt the patient when putting it onto the limb; and has inside one spine like across an arachnid or iron, to place a candlestick handle, and are both large and small according to illnesses and the season of those taking them; because suction cups for children are different from adults' ones, and slimmer than fat's.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And we should place this suction cup onto the limb: take the candlewick or thread and put it through the suction cup across the spine that is inside the suction cup, ensuring light is at the bottom of the suction cup to prevent burning the patient; then place it onto the limb, keep your fingers on the blunt area as we mentioned, so when you want, if vapor comes out, remove the suction cup; and take the thread in a similar way, repeat frequently if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup then which is administered in pleurisy disease, there is no strength nor lack thereof for any age or severity, and it is administered forcibly only when it is full of fluid, and placed solely on the body part; and this is its form.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Blistering blisters are administered only in limbs where one cannot place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and they should be treated in naked bodies like elbows or knees, and others similarly. The quality of blistering is that when you find blisters that are in mild cool water without pus, take them; then put a nut in warm water until they are familiarized, with nothing in their stomachs; and then lance the veins and apply suction cups, then rub the body until it turns red, then place the blisters on it; and when they are full, and release, if there is any area where one can place a suction cup, then put it on, for this lasts a long time afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, lift the aid in fire and water, quite well, then smear it with essence. And if the aid recovers too soon after the dislocation process, soak a linen cloth in cold water, put it on, until the skin is dry; and if there are multiple wounds, put powdered vitriol or ash on them, until they are dry; or you can place half of peeled peas under the wound and leave them to roast against the aid, which will now stop bleeding. And if you need more, take other veins.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the veins don't easily take, rub the aid with fresh blood or stick an awl into them until blood comes out, then put it back, and soon as they smell the blood, they will dry; and when you see that they are bleeding, powder a little aloes and powdered wheat on it, or ash, and they will heal now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and for restoring fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, my dear son, that the remedies in this chapter, which are not found in any of the old books, nor have anyone ever read them; and for this reason, the knowledge has been removed from our land, because I never found any good ones; and I know nothing else, relying solely on the knowledge from the old books I studied extensively as part of my scientific work, through experimentation, and by the habit of my life; and in this chapter, I have described what is contained within it, abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the shapes of the instruments that are used, just like I did in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary that we outline or introduce this book's contents and chapters where the senses apply their understanding, staying true to reality. This way, those who have experienced it will know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fractures or dislocations or twists or coldness come to any part of the body, it is necessary for you to quickly cleanse the patient on both sides, without leaving anything behind, like weakness in body parts, children, or old people; if the person's strength isn't sufficient, too hot, too cold; and consume cold foods such as icy jousts, and liver and goat meat, and do not drink wine, nor eat fatty meats. Do not fill your stomach with meat that fills blood vessels until you are certain there is no abscess or spreading of material within the body. If the patient recovers under their previous governance until it was used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that cause abundant nourishment, or have a viscous quality, such as cooked wheat in water, and onions, and chestnuts, and peas, and beef stomachs, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, among similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with this nourishment, the injuries are healed more quickly and the breaking [of bones] is overcome.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones of the old and the decrepit cannot be properly repaired or joined according to their nature due to the drying out of the limbs, or those as well who are too soft, such as the bones of young children; but give care, set on the broken bone I large pieces that swell up and unite the limb together, until it resists as it was before; and do not end abruptly with your work, for this needs to be fed with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures come in many different ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the foot or leg, and in this chapter I will tell you all the ways of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is breaking that would go to war, and another when sharpening, such as the size of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if with breaking due to injury, and breaking with a small crack in its entirety.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And for each way it has its own tool and proper instrument in restoration, according to what memory brings to the mind; and is known that the breaking of the bone appears when the limb is twisted, opens well from outside, and feels pressing under the hand; and when there is no twisting or hitting sensation, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no breakage; but it may have twisting, or crack, or small breakage.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	But if you cannot move it by hand, then apply the remedies that follow next, and then gently manipulate it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the breach which went in the direction of the animal, and its two parts are detached, now they must be placed evenly as you would do with pus stains or gashes; and if pus comes out after being dressed, let it have no rest until the pus subsides; then place it even as you can lightly and carefully move it, knowing that the restoration of this is easier than in those with pieces; then squeeze it as per what follows.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are pieces broken, and it is divided into two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or at your hand it's a small limb, or divided into two tendons, or one tendon at your hand; then place the limb according to its natural shape, so when the broken parts of the member are healed, you should stretch them in all directions by moving them as you can, and make sure that through your actions no injury or pain befalls the patient; and adjust both ends of the bone well according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with your hand if it doesn't seem to be perfectly located: if it is dressed beautifully, and not strained too much, without squeezing as those who bring out abscesses by their work do, just like we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limbs are in place, chastise well the patient so they do not move them, neither while awake nor asleep, neither when turning around, nor in any other manner; and ensure that the limbs are securely placed to prevent any feeling of pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And when they do not feel any pain, they are not in the right position yet. It is necessary to arrange them properly so that they do not feel any pain. Ensure they are placed correctly; let no curvature come about when you restore them; and know that the quality of the broken limb follows what I am telling you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that limbs broken are various in size and extent, and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	And there are small limbs like arms and legs and so on: it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen. For those that are larger such as stomachs and thighs: they should be wrapped with wide and firm bindings, because the wider bands embrace the whole large limb and squeeze it evenly from all sides, ensuring no gap exists; then tie them tightly around with small loops according to the size of the limb, making sure your hand presses slightly on every part of the binding. Then go above the break and tighten less so as not to move the break; gently soften the band little by little until a significant portion of the healthy side is reached; start again with another band and tie around it tightly like before; then come back just below the break area, tight it moderately neither too hard nor too soft, as we explained in the previous section. Then place linen or bandage loops between the bindings till they are evenly placed, then secure everything above the bend, and finally put on properly made pins if there is no pus or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, you should place a soothing anti-abscess substance upon it and remove the swelling, allowing it to stay this way for some days; then work on your stars (referring to acupuncture points), using needles that are half the width of a hair carefully reinserted, or from the shafts used to make acupuncture needles, or from palm leaves, fitting them according to this description.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it must be that the stars (acupuncture points) one puts on the piercing are slightly larger and wider than the others; they should also be as long as is necessary for the size of the limb, whether small or large. Then insert them onto the stars just like you did at your first attempt, then place a supplementary thread above them, similar to what was done at the first attempt on the piercing site; make it tighter than before, but not too tight now; and ensure that the thread is medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, made from soft linen. For if the thread is large, like some people who create their needlework with rough linen cord threads, and this is a great mistake, because the piercing cannot be uniform if it's too fine, and it doesn't suit for there to be less than two finger widths between each star.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the limbs are bruised by the joints of the sockets after reduction in their healthy positions, then apply padding with linen or shredded wool on them, so that they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is due to piercing (or stab) injury, and the ribs are broken, I will instruct on its treatment thereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	Know that it's not suitable to fully stretch all the broken limbs right from the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not appropriate to apply these plasters until after five days or seven, or longer according to your treatment in each case; and here comes the way of the ancient plastering for restoring breaks, dislocations, and twists: take flour that stands on mill walls, mix it with plenty of egg, and make this concoction neither too thin nor too thick. Use it like this, and this is the common method of the restorative plaster for fixing fractures in various positions, just as well with women and young children since it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method for setting breaks and dislocations and twists: take three parts of garlic and dill and wormwood and asafetida and Arabic gum and mastic, in total. Use five parts of myrrh and aloes, also in total. Add seven parts of alechil. Grind all these into a powder, then mix them with the yolk of an egg; if the mixture is warm, use this plaster as it has a good composition, and quickly heals broken bones, proving beneficial to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plastering for twisting injuries: take mugwort and valerian root, each in 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, each in 9 parts; aloe six parts; Armenian balm ten parts. Grind them well together, mix with water or plenty of egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method for bandaging joints and bones in their place, and relieving the pain that occurs, and using the bone and fracture: take new wool, and the grease in a dish with oil cooked, and place it on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Bandages do not heal completely, but they are better for soothing abscesses and properly treating bone pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plastering that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and terrestrial oak leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method for bandaging in the restoration of bone fracture and to alleviate the exudation from the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of willow herb, chamomile, violet flowers, groundnut, from each one part; and grind, mix with wine, and if the limbs are warm, mix it with wet coriander water, or water alone, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method more effective than the first one when it comes to reattachment during healing of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of vismalve, and linseed, balmroot, melilot, and wormwood, and flowers of violet and chamomile, from all take one part; and grind and mix with saltwater, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Hippocrates instructs that one should apply to the broken limb for strength restoration using a paste made of wax and oil, and nothing else, more. He says it should be neither too soft nor too hard between two states.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen suggests one should apply to the broken limb for restoration dry things slightly warm, such as mire, aloe, incense, and similar items, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to make plaster useful for injury and pain: take mussels and pigeon meat or bird feathers, and basil leaves, and equal parts of wine vinegar, grind them together, and then make a plaster with it and use it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then gently move it after some time, and watch so that the patient does not feel any pain or movement in his bone from its place. If you do this by hand instead of using tools. And if pain comes to the limb, or itching without rest or swelling, then rush, remove the splint, and put on a new one immediately; take light strips and wet sponge, dip them in water, and cool the limb until the itching stops and the pain is relieved; then let the member rest for an hour, then place it under dry wool, moistened with water or oil, and secure it with a bandage, as long as you are sure of preventing infection. And calm the inflammation of the limb, and relieve the pain, then start the delicate reattachment again with just a little splint, and do not apply pressure as before; and handle it delicately until it heals.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that pus and redness, pain and swelling are present throughout the bone, and you need to plaster and bind it, then repeat as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if there is no change in the limb that we have said, or if it only gets reset after three to four or five or seven days; and never let it stay for more than twenty days, as shown, until the swelling subsides and the adjustment of the flesh comes about. Then you should hold the restraint tighter than before, and increase its meat production, just as I have said previously. And if you see that the skin has dried too much beyond what is necessary, understand that complications cannot occur; immerse it then in hot water each time you reset it, every third day, and cleanse a little of the wound; through this process, remove the pus from the limb and hasten those who do not heal properly, causing the limb to return in a distorted manner: this is bad news, and these are harmful operations, and I see nothing else other than just letting it dry naturally and opening it straightly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various methods of fracturing
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many methods of fractures exist, and various appearances are present. The causes are categorized; for there are fractures made from the impact of a sword, and neck fractures that reach the bone up to its junction with flesh, just below the bone, like in an animal or a staff attack; thus this type of fracture is named "haunching".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing it, this kind of injury is called 'absolute break'; and it refers to the wounds resulting from these two types of breaks, whether large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is sequential striking, or crack, or from the stone itself, or impact on the stone, or other similar incidents.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a partial break, which approaches until it reaches the tissue under the bone, or above the bone, and this injury can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there's a wound that is healed within an os as delicate as hair, and the crack small, thus this fracture is named "hairline"; and if the injury is caused by striking with stone or falling or some other thing, causing the piece of bone to fall inwards, such as how candle makers make holes into candles; if there's a piece inside the stone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this occurs more often in those with softer bones like the head of someone moistened by water, such as an infant's skull; and it happens through all these methods of fracture where small pieces are dislodged, like in stables; and I will speak on its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all methods of fractures through their dislocation upon them, and the examination by prodding, and through the decayed flesh that is on them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	Hair loss is known by those who when an osseous fragment has been revealed and rubbed together, if it exposes black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be cautious about malaise incidents, and if you do not see any ill-omened accidents such as vomiting, loss of understanding, expansion, paleness, fever, or if the eyes start to come out and turn red, or show other symptoms in various conditions, there is no certainty that it can heal.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming accidents, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the bone comes to you first, and it's in winter, if you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day after your arrival that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it's in summer, you should remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh around the bone becomes rotten, and accidents as we've said occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of bone has reached up to the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to cut open the broken part thus: and take hold of the part of the body in pain, exposing on the bone in all ways that are possible, and with regard to the appearance of the wound as much as possible. And if bleeding occurs during exposure, or pus forms, use what is appropriate and fill the space with damp linen in oil roset; then allow the wound to rest until the pus stops forming and bleeding ceases. Then begin by removing through the bone and proceed according to two ways of work: one way involves cutting a narrow slit from behind, which results in this shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another cut, which is larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have several different cuts, some narrow and others wide, all sharp, and made of iron; and work with light hands, making sure not to pierce the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and beyond piercing, you should pierce it through, ensuring that you make cuts with steady hands, not all the way through so as not to penetrate beyond the bone by mistake, and there should be a margin or circle of about an inch above the tip, preventing the tip from passing through the bone; and you should have several of them, so each touches its length of the bone, ensuring that there are tines for both sides; this is the form of the three methods of piercing.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to pierce inside the broken bone is that you place one wick on the bone and turn with your fingers until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then put the wick elsewhere a little after, and do this throughout, then cut in between the roots of the teeth where the bone exists, and do this more subtly than you can, gently, just as we have said, till you pull the bone to your hand or to none of the instruments that you have such as pliers, forceps; and make sure not to touch the brain nor the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and cut the bone, if it is necessary that you remove the substance that has remained from the bone to all other instruments similar to a file, but it should be more durable and more subtle than any other file; and if there remains nothing of the small bones, or no scales, then gently scrape them with the tools. Then treat the wound with coverings and treatments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way of treatment is this as Galien said, which is more safe; and the needle is very strong, and it's his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	Firstly, you must expose a part of the bone where the fracture opens and moves. So when you have exposed that part, place underneath the edge of this lens-shaped incision, as depicted here:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side alone, and have the part divided into two sides, so that you are cutting towards the bone; then with a small hammer above, such that you gently hit the entire bone, and be well aware of any surrounding tissue; if it is thin over the bone, then gently tap the bone, for bones can be tapped without harm and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, then after that roughness, it's necessary to remove the scales with a sharp shaver of which you should have various quantities. To administer each one as most appropriate according to the manual and the appearance of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you appear before great shavers, and then even finer ones, and don't stop doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair-cutting and finer breaks, you must administer care according to its direction; and this matter is not resolved for whoever has devoted their study to this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And when the wound is discovered, it should be that you take linen bandages according to the size of the wound and soak them in rosy oil, then place them on the wound. Then take another double layer of linen and soak it in wine and rosy oil, placing it above the first bandage; do this more lightly than possible so as not to weigh down the wound, then administer a further bandage from above, without applying too much force that only touches the wound; leave it like this for one or two days until any abscesses are calmed, then remove the bandages and administer medicines such as lily roots, powdered cloves, incense powder, and aristolochia, among other things. From these prepare a powder and place it on the wound, then administer further medicated powders that do not cause irritation; and be careful to keep the wound clean so that you do not leave oil behind or allow a clot to form, because when clots form on the tissue of the brain, they move about causing great harm; for when something corrosive is placed on the wound, it irritates from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore take care, if nothing happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if fear does not come out only because of the medicine we have put on, that virtue being there, it is necessary for you to take a portion of honey and three parts of rose oil and one drachm of glue, then apply this mixture onto your skin. Then treat it in ways that fit treatments, until it heals.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that neither of the two parts under the nose or even just one, because these are two bones; and this lower part is made of cartilage, it does not break, nor will it take to bend or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it's necessary for you to pinch your small finger or the back of your nose and make an equal break in that part inside your index finger. Then place this break at the tip and let air out from there until your nose regains its natural shape; do this gently and watch so that the patient doesn't feel pain due to your actions.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the area above the nose, and cannot reach the nostril from below, it should be positioned evenly to the top of a small stick that's a bit thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, redo this procedure, and try to restore it on the first day if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day when the abscess has subsided, then pinch at the base of your nose using a piece of linen. If the break was in one part, do so here.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you should apply a bundle on the other side as well, if the fracture is there too; and make them large enough to fill out the hollows of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no restorative requires mixing with butter, and turning each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I don't think it's quite right, but they should be made moist in the preparation of a mixture with an egg and powder from the mill; then leave the fabric, until the bone is hard and the cartilage toughened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one uses goose feathers instead of tents, and if it's mixed with one egg white, and if there is a wind, and the air goes among them; then do whatever you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses appear near the nose as you do them, then put wadding or moistened cotton in oil of rose, or a pinch of salt.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses occur without it happening, you should apply plaster outside, made of sifted charcoal and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk. Then place them on light bandages, do not tie too tight; and if the pieces break off easily by touching the nails, and they break into small pieces, then use suitable instruments for this purpose, then cut along the wound and treat all rotten parts, by joining together, as with plasters and ointments suitable for this. And if there is no wound inside the nail, you should treat the fabric; and you put on garlic leaves until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the rupture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured internally and there is no external wound,
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary; if the fracture is in the right part, you bend your index finger into the patient's mouth towards the side of the injury. And if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then bend your index finger of the right hand towards it, and gently apply pressure on the fracture internally, and perform this action with the other hand externally, making sure to do so evenly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is separated into two parts, then it's necessary to administer an extension for each part until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movements of the teeth occur, or rupture, then restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk. Place it on the broken mandible and place one double piece of cloth; and put another large tent on the cloth well made, or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the length of the mandible, and bind it up as tight as you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you notice that the figure changes, let it shift to its position on the third day and then adjust what has changed; cover with plaster, using powder from a mill combined with plenty of egg or ground oyster flour after removing the bandage; place a layer of wool on top, and when the plaster hardens, and the patient's condition doesn't change, let it be until they recover. Many times recovery occurs within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if pus-filled sores appear, then apply what we have instructed many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture combined with a wound, it's rewarded by none of the bone being extracted; if the extraction requires instruments suitable for this task.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there is nothing left, if the wound is wide, place one layer of plasters suitable for it to accelerate healing until it heals.
de la forcele	By the power.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The strength breaks many times before, around the shoulder, and the breaking happens in three ways: when it breaks and divides into two parts, with fragments, and is easier to restore; or when there's a break accompanied by an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the treatments are as follows when there's breaking without an injury, where you have two assistants, so one marks the shoulder that feels the broken strength; and the other stretches up to the neck towards the affected area; then equalize the break with your hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there's no visible or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, then place a round piece of cloth or wool under the shoulder towards the body; and make it as large as your need requires; stretch and lift the strength, hold the sphere in your hand so that you can equalize the break, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the strength away from the front due to its presence in front, it is necessary that the patient lie with their face towards their shoulder and place a half-collar under the shoulder. Then you should press the shoulder down, while supporting it, until the bone of the strength is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then use the break at your hands, and if you find debris there, it is necessary that you cut it up; and gently pull the pieces, and if the bone cannot join through any pressure, cut into one of the incisions you have made. But place this instrument on the strength, to prevent fluid from flowing out:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And seems like a spoon, and is not found anywhere, and it should be as wide as you need, according to the size of the bone and the power of your work; and has two heads, as you see, and one is broad, and the other is narrow, just like the opening of the wound that you have made when you have treated the bones; and when you are sure about extracting the contents, if it disturbs the wound, and if the opening is small, or if you doubt about extracting the contents properly, if you cover the wound with bandages and tents, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if there is pus being extracted, then moisten it with oil, rose water and honey, and place it on the affected area.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The process of bone dressing when it involves wounds and size, is as follows: you place on the bone a plaster made from the powder ground by the mill and some yolk of egg, then lay light bandages over it. If needed, put a ball under the wound area. Then take a very long bandage about one palm wide, cover the bandages with two layers of bandage, and then apply the plaster on top. Next, take a slender rod three fingers wide and long, wrap it around the bandage so that the edge of the bandage hangs down, making sure to keep the bandage at this height. Put the rod over the wound area, and secure the bandage at the neck. The bandage should be kept tight until the wound area is clean from both sides and you can clearly see that the rod isn't moving upwards on the broken bone. Then reapply the bandage each day, and when all threads are cut, keep restraining it. Make sure the wound heals properly by having the patient lie with a pillow under their shoulder to lift the weight off of the shoulder blade, which reduces the strain on the injured area. If you need to immobilize the arm at the neck due to potential bad accidents, do so for up to 20 days after which you can resume normal activities as long as the wound heals well within this time frame; for some people it may take up to 28 days and less than that for others.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	A fracture occurs when the shoulder breaks or is extensively torn, and this happens only upon impact; if you align it according to the shape of the breakage, then reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways possible; then apply powdered flour from the mill with plenty of eggs, and make light bandages, and place them on both sides; then put a wide but fine stick slightly wider than the shoulder, where there is no movement at any part of the shoulder, so fill that space with linen threads, so that the stick fits evenly; and then tighten it into one large bandage tightly, so that the stick does not move from its place, and check the join each day; and every time when it loosens, you tighten it, and make sure the stick is still secure if it has moved from its place, and place the patient on their side; and the shoulder is recovered in twenty days or twenty-five. And once this number of days are fulfilled, you remove the brace, and be certain, for it's not bone that comes together lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone piece sticks out before, and there's no opening in the skin, then cut it open and operate on the bone as we've instructed in handling injuries to the thigh for soothing abscesses.
de la brisure dou pis	On the breaking of the heel
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bones are sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but they often break at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if one falls away from it and the patient feels great pain, accompanied by nausea and vomiting, blood coming out of an opening made within the broken bone, and everyone perceives well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration should be such that the body lies on its back and you place one and a half cushions between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs of two ribs with your hands, and delicately put them equal in all ways that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then lay bandages and wadding above the delicate salt draft or another lightweight substance, and wrap it tightly with a blanket, and fix it to the broken bone so that it doesn't move; and turn the bandage around the back smoothly, and compress it evenly, and reward each hour the injured person, and if it heals, then tighten; and if it needs to be released due to corrosion or itching in the body, or pain or abscess, you should act quickly, release it, remove the bandages, and treat the one who has come seeking remedies in ways of treatment; then replace the bandage again and compress until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of bone fracture
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the fracture of ribs occurs only after a large hit on the back, and within the chest cavity, and they can bend due to being brittle; and one feels this well during examination at the bedside.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And for the repairs, you should put the break equal, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply plaster and if needed, bind it with a strip, provided you have the need for it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is occurring inside, then the patient feels intense pain and cramps, like crying, because the bone punctures the skin; and they have spots, and are hot and vomit large amounts of blood, and this is a sick health state, and the elderly often suffered great suffering.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say it is suitable to administer meat that inflates the belly, in order to relieve the nausea outside.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not follow this rule, as pus and ointments do not come from within, if they have not already appeared.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has appeared, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And it is said by none of us to apply suction cups over the skin, in order to suck out the contents, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the suction cup draws away excesses from the body due to the weakness's positioning.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And it is said that when one must cover the body with moist wool in hot oil, and they place wicks between the ribs to make the heat even everywhere inside, then apply the treatment for pleurisy, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that cannot be borne through the hole where there is no skin covering it, and there is doubt with the patient as to whether one should cut at his side of the broken rib, and you need to insert an instrument between them; then you must cut into the bone, drain lightly, and then stitch the two edges of the wound if they are large, and dress it with plaster until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses appear, place them on wet cloths in oil rose, and put it under your arm; and treat as the part needs for abscess treatment, and ensure good circulation at the point where it should be, until it becomes clear.
de la brisure dou col	Of the breakage of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	In no instance does the breaking of bones at the neck occur, and there is no bending; similarly with the spine in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to none and you want to know if they will recover or not, be vigilant: if you see that his hands are softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move or stretch them, and when you poke them with a needle, if he does not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	You know that it can be fatal in various ways, and if he moves and feels well when they are held still and not, you know that the bone joint is saved, and the patient has been cured, as long as a remedy is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And when this kind of situation occurs in the spine of the back, to know if it is sound or not, you must be vigilant that his joints are softened and that the body accidents occur where they are in contact with his limbs, and at the back wind and evacuation against his will; and when it has been observed on its abdomen, it does so by wind and evacuation against his will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is stretched out on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot do so.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that they are mortal: if not treated in their cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if such an event does not happen to him, then it is a lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is this: if there is pus at the site, apply a poultice of sulfur or oil from an egg, until it eases; then place on one of the reinforcing plasters and drying ones, and bind with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until they recover.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone becomes exposed, you must cover it with your hand; and remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound if it's large, with stitches, then treat with an ointment that hardens in a couple days until they heal; and if the bone chip is broken, which is called 'the chip from the knee', you should hold your left hand pouch against your right hand at your power, then place the plaster and heating on it as needed; then press it down, and if there's any exposed bone, you apply it over it, remove the bone, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Regarding the breaking of the hip bone's fracture
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does happen, there might be a slight discomfort at the thigh; and it stretches long, declines towards the knees, and brings pain to the patient at the thigh, bruising, and swells up the one that breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand upwards as long as you are at the site of the fracture. And know which bone is broken and its shape; and if the break is only in the thigh, put the break even as it is, until it reaches its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is along the length or it declines towards the inside, have the patient lie on their stomach, as long as your restoration of this break becomes apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, place it on the plaster, then put onto a charcoal or coal grate, and keep it warm so that it does not move. And apply the heat across their back until the wound is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his sound side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if abscesses appear under the skin, do not touch them until the abscesses are alleviated and placed as we have said before; then return to the restoration process, apply pressure as is necessary, without any bad incident occurring. This is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The assistants are those that are between the knife and the shoulder cap, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to either of two methods: where one would take a full rod of medium thickness, as per this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two joints with two bands, and bend them upwards, placing the skin on one site; then let the broken arm rest on the rod, until it reaches the armpit, having formed half of a rod curve, then place them under any heavy object or have those serving to hold them in place downwards; then position the eyes (apparently referring to the hands) so that the break is evenly aligned with their combined width, until the broken limb returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is as follows: have the skin resting on his elbow and tie the hand to his neck, then instruct two servants that one should shave off the area where there's the break at his hands, and the other should cut along both sides of each inch mark, spreading out each person according to their own part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more severe, hold it while the bruising occurs, and above the bruising, extend each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the bruising is close to the head of the shoulder, it should be tied halfway between sitting and up, and the other towards the knife, above the bruising; and similarly if the bruising is towards the knife, you must tie lightly, without effort, until the bruising is even across the left and across the knife; then make an even incision, as it should, and extract, provided that no abscess comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if pus comes out, do not tighten for more than seven days, and place it on greased wool in a comfortable position and in oil rose; until the pus coming out is relieved. Then hold tight, using this method of holding: you should put the plaster on the wound, then join the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and apply the cloth, tighten it both on the shoulder joint and on the arm, so that the arm rests in its natural position, without any obstruction, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use braces, and place an extra large and strong brace above the wound, keeping one inch of space between each brace. Each brace should be so wide that it passes three inches on either side of the wound; then hold tight with these braces, as I explained at the beginning of this chapter about the wound, more firmly and not by pulling away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the base of the nails and constriction, as we have said, at the time when you are restoring the broken member, and you doubt about discharging pus, if you leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine each three days the bandage, so that itching does not spread in the area or comes to the body because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such incidents occur, or if it isn't released until three days or later, and the patient lies with the illness on his back, having his hands on his stomach; then place under the shoulder one blanket of equal wool evenly. Examine each hour for a day or for food time, so that the shape of the broken member doesn't move, or that the bindings aren't softened; if the address by the virtue of medicine, and give him the meat that we have already placed, in such manner that the meat is at first tender; and when it begins to regain strength, then make it firm.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg must be repositioned within forty days of all; thereafter one should dislocate them again, and administer baths and medications for local application to aid in recovery.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly or constricted, it should be held for dislocation for 1 day or 2 months.
de la brisure du bras	"Of the breaking of the arm"
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the pair 'foscile'. One bone is small, and it's this one that covers the elbow; and the other bone is large, and it's this one that lies underneath, towards the little finger. By chance, only the larger foscile breaks or both could break, or they might come together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is lighter and more successful, and the healing. And when large bones are broken, the healing goes badly, and it's worse than if they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, then it's appropriate to gently extend it slightly and put them in alignment.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it's the large bone that is broken, then it's appropriate to pull more strongly; and extend it on the first rib, and lift the palm of the hand higher than the others, and the small finger lower than the other fingers, and let the ribs cross themselves, with the first rib in front of him higher, so that the body doesn't suffer any pain; then extend the attendant's arm to the part above his hand or elbow, and another attendant at the other one on top.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the eyes evenly, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if during the breaking into pieces, you place each in its place, and if there is none that sticks to the bone when you grasp it, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do on and with the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if during the healing process, I mentioned it in a separate chapter; if take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if during the beginning of the restoration abscesses occur, then make a dressing from roset oil and white beeswax that is neither too hard nor too soft; and tie the dressing on subtly, so long as the abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And apply the wax, and place the plaster of ground powder mixed with plenty of egg, then insert the needles. Make sure that the needles are inserted slightly beyond the point of wounding, and a little wider than the others; you should be aware that there must be six to eight needles or pins in various positions: either when the wound is within one bone, or two bones; apply more on the wound area compared to other parts, just as I explained at the beginning of this chapter; let the bandages covering the wound be soft and moist, neither hard nor abrasive. The threads used for stitches should be made from linen, not too thick and not too thin, as we have mentioned.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And after a few days, restore the member and the connection.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad events come to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, it is necessary for you to immerse the member in hot water, until that itchness is alleviated; and leave the member not moved to rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then continue the tightening, and if the ligaments have been destroyed and the bones are exposed, as seems appropriate.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if precautions are taken so that no stiffness comes to the member, because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it by rubbing, and let it rest for a few days, until the stiffness passes, and then tighten it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said happens to the patient, or if the untying lasts up to twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Otherwise, or for some time, then place his hands on his neck, and make sure his necks are even, and guard against movement and strain, and sleep on his back; and know that this healing takes place in thirty days or forty-five, and by chance in twenty, according to the compositions and the complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You should know that on the back of the hand and around our thumbs there are few injuries, and it only causes many plagues.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is broken or swelled, it is necessary for the patient to lie with their palm facing up and straight ahead as well; then they should place their hand on an extended surface, extend their fingers over the broken bones, and align them evenly until they are properly connected; and they should apply bandages and splints, if no abscesses develop, then they should place a splint according to the size of their hand; and it should be wrapped in one linen sheet.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the injury is located at or near the belly of the sole, then make a bundle with cloths, and instruct the patient to place this on their broken foot; and then apply a long cloth wrap, and have them wear a splint that fits as well as possible for the size of their hand, just like they would for their entire hand.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is at the front, it should be that you place one pin above and another under in the foot, so that the hands are open and straight, then tie them altogether under the hand, and seal off the connection between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to any of our fingers, if it is in the middle, as it should be; and bind with the foot, and if you see that place a small pin upright to lift the break, and do not move; and if the break is at another finger, such as in the index or one of the others, then place it evenly, and tie with the healthy finger which comes after; or you tie all together holding them, so they don't move, or you put a pin there as for when we fix it. And take care in the restoration and positioning of each abscess, and apply what comes to that person, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken foot
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the knee is broken many times, and one can see it often when it turns forward and backward; and its repair consists in joining .1 above the breakage, and another .1 below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the limbs lie on their face, then extend each minister his link to its equal part; and this is when the breakage is inside the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the bruising is close to the root of the toe, then one ligament goes towards the nail and the other ligaments under the bruising.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And similarly if it is close to the knee joint, then place the ligaments inside the joint, and the backward extension; then place the bones even with her two hands until they are according to her natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and secure it, should there be no abscesses coming about.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is pus at the site, let it heal then return to your work and treatment; the operation has been performed in such manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the bruise with two or three layers of stiff bandage and leave excess, then bend the leg until the heels reach the base of the knee, and secure the thread longitudinally between the toe and the leg, under the knee joint, and pull the knot above; then rewrap on the leg and on the toe with the bandage, then place a peg over the bruise and another on the bone of the leg; then fill in between the leg and the toe with eight strips of fabric to make it even pressure, then start wrapping three or four times around the bruise; and as you go above the bruise, wrap less tightly; then tie the two ends of the thread that you have placed between the leg and the toe, securing three pegs above them, then return under the knot where the thread is, until you see it passing down the foot; and tighten so that it doesn't move from its place, then leave it like this, until no other sign of abscess or swelling appears.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, set it free, and address whatever comes up, just as we have said many times. And if there are pieces of bone that catch hold, it's right to remove them, provided they can be removed; and if you cannot, then it's right to cut the wound open, and drain the pus; and treat it in such a way as we have said, until it heals completely.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the wrist broken when one places them like this, as in the shoulder and arm; still, no complaint from the patient follows such a restoration.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the wrist is restored in one or two days, or perhaps less or perhaps more, depending on the variety of physiques.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the alley of the gallbladder
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that at the knee joint there is some cracking sound, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it's only a crack or it might be broken off, and it affects all injuries, and one feels pain, and this is well noticed.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is this: if you place it evenly with what's round at its ends until they are assembled and moveable, then apply plaster. And put an oval piece on top if you need to, and tighten it according to how it should be done, then redo all the arrangements we've talked about in other injuries, like pus and similar; for each condition put what suits it, as long as it's sound.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, from which one is called straightly "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; and it can suffer all kinds of injury just like the arm does. And the treatment for this is similar to that of an arm, with the procedures being the same. And as if both of these bones were broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the larger bone is broken, one feels great pain and can see it clearly; then the leg turns out of place.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply traction, and make it even, and tie the stars evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly and there are more than several pieces, that the traction should be weaker and more gentle; and adjust according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two lengths of checked wood that bend the leg on one side and the other, and let them be as long as half the length of the leg from the knee to below; then wrap these in two layers of twine over and under, and tie them in the middle so that the leg cannot lean to the right or left; thus it is well; and no one should apply a single strip this length made of wood for the leg, and place it on guard against any movement. It must be properly done at the break where there is injury; and move the leg each day, to see if there is any pus or other incident; continue the cure until it is sane.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of bone fracture due to impact
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no breakage, but with bone impact breakage occurs and in the lower leg bones, it only results from shaking under various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is an impact breakage at the bones in the leg, and you see these bones press one against another, place them like bones on the ground, just as if they wanted to go, and then put your foot on his ankle, where the bones are raised, push them as much as it takes for them to return to their sockets; then apply plaster and bandages around this side of the leg, and place a small table under both ankles, each filled with about two inches. Then press against the leg up to its bending point, then when you have wrapped cloths around them, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if you remove the bandage, because you will find that the bones are even, whether broken or re-aligned.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the ribs are broken, repair them as we said about the ribs of the hand. Then put a splint on the broken rib according to its length, and make it slightly wider than that, then place under the foot this board I spoke of, and apply even pressure; and if there are two or three, or more, break them, put one splint on each rib according to their size, wrapped in one linen sheet, and hold the table against the foot. And being on the head of the table facing towards the belly of the foot, make sure it is well positioned.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things I've said about other injuries, just as we have discussed; and assist each case according to how it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Regarding the breaking of the bone in the hand.
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of the woman's body are broken, have her lie with widened hips, then tilt her towards the back part of her waist and hold her by her rear. Then fill the natural cavity in her body with cotton stuffing to the same size as she is; and place some of this inside her as well. Next, help the woman stand up slowly while lifting her back a little at a time, until the cotton comes out till it reaches the opening of nature and pushes the bones together again with her strength. And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, after which she should return to normal; do this for seven or more days: then the break will be restored. If you want to observe it closely, take a goat bladder and tie a stick at its neck and fill the whole bladder into nature; then blow air into the stick until the bladder inflates internally; nature will heal the break. Then fill it with cotton again and leave her like this for some days until she is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the elbow is broken, or in women if it's left as such like we have said for the hip bone; and these nearby breaks should not be overlooked by those who devote their study and usage to it, and hear my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And breaking signifies more than multiple ways of restoring the correct path of restoration: hence, understand it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the case of the penis if it is broken, take a goose’s throat and fill the penis with it; then wrap bandages around it, and let it be for three days or as long as needed, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	From fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the person with a fracture that also has a wound, even if it's large, like in the case of bones in the elbow or shoulder or similar, to be now cleaned, so that the cleanings which we have mentioned bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, you can fumigate it with vitriol (sulfuric acid), and if you don't have anything else, then start restoring the fracture in that same hour or day; or when abscesses do not appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscesses start appearing, let the restoration continue for another day or two, until the abscess subsides, and don't touch it on the third or fourth day, because you might provoke a harmful incident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if bone is broken and visible at the site of the open wound, it is necessary to place your hands on it gently, in a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not present for you to align evenly with your hands, take this iron instrument that is made of steel, which is seven inches or six inches long, and the width should match the size of the wound; and for this purpose, the surgeon must choose three or four (depending on what he needs for each treatment of bone fracture), and it should be round and a bit large so that it doesn't bend under compression against your limb during surgery, and it should have points at the front, and be thick in the middle forward.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche" because it requires that the curved heads be placed on the tip of the visible bone; and it should be struck once, until it heals, and be equal against each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle, and the instruments cannot properly grasp the bone, it requires that you cover the tip of the bone, as long as the instruments have control over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone to its place, as we have said, if you have an appropriate tool for this purpose, such as a scalpel or a fine awl, then with your strength; then reposition that which is staying in the hard part of the bone and small cuts.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels intense pain afterwards, you should know it hasn't been placed in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you place it so that it's in its natural position, then moisten the dressing with tannic black wine, and properly if this is in good condition; and don't put wax or anything else on the wound where there's ointment, as it might lead to infection and decay; then administer herbs when you have set the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover everything surrounding it according to the size of the wound, and make sure that the wound is not restricted by breaking; many times this has been done by fools, causing harm or decay in the patient one way or another; and the compresses should be softer and less destructive than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt that an accident might have happened there, as we have said before, and you find pain in your hand, it doesn't suit to place splints; but wrap around, instead of splints, hard cloths, and secure them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one day or two days that the wound is swelling, remove what you have placed with all the wine, and apply a healing ointment for wounds, such as the quadrifarmaceutical ointment and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary for you to dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is united and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it should be so that the joints of the limb are put together in such a way that the bone slips down slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if this continues day after day, and it cannot be joined but stays like that, know that there are small bone pieces causing pain due to which you should cover the wound with a tent, and remove all these pieces of dead tissue that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the wound, or any other form of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what he explained in his previous chapter.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when bone is broken and exposed in the body, as with the bone of the elbow or shoulder, and other similar large bones, do not attempt to set it because many times this leads to death. Instead, leave it until it heals naturally; by chance, the pus will come out from him after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can. If you cannot, just leave it as it is.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The burns that come from sweat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	The burns come many times after the healing of the burn wound, even when it's close to the joint. A strange thing is to see the shape of the limb; and by chance it cannot perform its natural acts on the limb.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care therefore when this thing is fresh: if you administer stiffening medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, along with sarsaparilla, licorice, and other similar things, do so according to your preference or combine them all, mixing them with stictic wine or with plenty of egg or with garlic; then apply them on the wound in poultices, apply them well, and don't remove it by hand for days; then remove it, and start another poultice as long as the pustules are removed; or you can apply over a piece of plaster that has been made properly; because the properties of plaster allow to remove all swellings from the limbs; and if the pustule has hardened like stone and needs removal, cut through it from above, revealing excess fluid; or have it sanded by someone until it is removed, and continue treatment until healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The limb which becomes weak after the siege (or after a period of confinement or hard work)
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the breaking of the bone is restored, and afterwards the limbs remain weak and delicate, this can happen for various reasons: due to which it was bound too tightly and wasn't bound as it should have been; or due to there being too many bindings, and not being able to bring the respiration to the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or due to too large movements, not in its time; or due to having little blood in his body, if it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat well, and make the body soft until the healing spreads in him; then give them baths, and provide them joy and comfort. Then apply grease on the limb so that the grease attracts to the main respiration, and washes it with water often, until the respiration matches the limb. And restore its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	If the member is twisted after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken openly, and the shape of the limb is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: nor should one believe those who say that we must break the entire limb anew. And many foolish people have done this in our land; these procedures are criticized, and they bring great harms, even causing death at times. However, if the dislocations and pains are still fresh, you should heat them with hot water or cook soothing herbs such as leaves of comfrey, roots, and mallow, among others; and apply a moistening plaster, like well-made yarrow. You take the comfrey sap and mix it with lard or oil from saffron, and make a plaster from that; or you take greased figs, grind them with bran, and other medicines that are made soothing by heating.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the node removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be gentle movement of the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the dislocation has become old and hardened like bone, requiring treatment with an iron instrument, so it should be cut up to the bone at a subtle incision lightly; and place supervision and diligence in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the body.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation affects no particular area but now requires immediate restoration without hesitation.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the limbs swell, and by chance one might place points in their swollen state; this should not be done when moving them at the hour they are swollen: many times it leads to pus and other pains. Nevertheless, when such happens, make the patient rest until the abscesses subside; then immerse the limb in warm water and oil, then gently manipulate it, and cure each limb as it seems right for their state.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder dislocations up until here.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It happens that the jaws are dislocated and downwards, and the dislocations of both occur in two ways: either they are somewhat ossified at their joints and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the feet, causing saliva from the mouth to spill out, and preventing them from closing their mouths, as well as wrapping their tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a dislocation is small, it can return through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And when it is complete and carried out, you should remove the cautery quickly, without hesitation; and in such a way that the surgeons prick the neck of the patient near the illness, and place the nails at the root of the dislocation of the jawbone within the mouth, if the dislocation involves two parts; and the other hand must be pulled out with both hands to ensure they are even; instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And keep pushing until she wakes up in her place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if returning it causes pain, in the same way, if they are two jaws together, then use hot water and oil, as long as you gently reset them; don't overly force the return, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is well sealed with soothing, then apply wet bandages in a poultice made from rosy oil and beeswax, then bind them lightly with moist string; let the patient rest on their back, and their limbs should be placed between two cushions, so they don't move neither to the right nor to the left, nor try to stretch too much, but should eat light food until the pains are eased, and the jaws are set firmly in place; then allow them to drink and dine lightly, without opening their mouth for eating or drinking, until the jaw is well set and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be set properly within an hour and are not returned to their original position, this results in fevers and recurrent illnesses, as well as occasional abdominal discomfort or vomiting.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is loss; and many times, death befalls the one who experiences it within eight days.
de la forcelle	from the forcefulness
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The strength cannot relieve the pain from within or below, it relieves only when outside, and one certainly feels this.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; then press with your palm to form a shape, and it will return; then place on the plaster and the bandage, and tighten; and if there's any pus in front of the wound, it cannot become dislocated; but if it does, reset it at its original location, as we said before; then place on the plaster and the bandage, and tighten, and command the patient to rest until they are healed; and thus similarly is brought back the shoulder blades when they have been removed from their socket.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	On the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder dislocation occurs according to three ways: out of which one is that it dislocates at the part of the acromion below; and the second is at the part near the heel; and by chance dislocates at the part above, this happens very rarely; and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and it gets dislocated repeatedly from under towards the acromion, even in those with little flesh, because they tend to do so quickly; in those who have enough flesh, it jumps out and then comes back in.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance happens in some men due to impact or bruising, and the shoulder swells up with an abscess and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	So then you must verify it as long as you are sure about it; and only after that start the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And understand the dislocations when it goes down towards the acromion, and makes a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their obvious diversity; and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and from the acromion to the deltoid region of the shoulder, just like if it were an eye. And the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move with any movements; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not completely hidden, because you find it clearly at the clavicle; and this way of dislocation can only be restored when it is new, or when there is a baby in the mother.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister lifts his hand from the ailment up top, then places his fingers on the surface, and lifts the joint up forcefully to its original position; and the minister lifts his hand, extends it upwards, placing it onto [the affected area]; if it moves too quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it doesn't come as we have said within a few days after, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and apply soothing, calming remedies, such as decoctions of rue, fenugreek, and tansy in warm water, then apply this. Then bandage the patient's backside, place wool under their armpit, not too soft nor too hard. Next place your fingers on their heel under the wool, lift up their shoulder with a strong but gentle movement, guide your hand down towards the ailment; and another assistant should cut off the top of their shoulder so that it doesn't move downwards. That shoulder is now back in position, if you see that it has been correctly reset this way: And it's necessary for there to be someone larger than the patient present at home during this process; and stand straight towards the side, prop up your shoulder under the patient’s assistant, lift up the armpit high so that the patient hangs down in a curve; then another assistant should guide their hand downwards of the patient towards their abdomen.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if they let the patient become too light, to carry him with no weight at all, then the dislocation comes back immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the reset may also be done in another way: and you stick the long stake into the ground, so that the limb is also bent like a bow, and it's neither too big nor too soft; then place it under the patient, but let there be soil beneath it, and the limb must stay long enough with the shaft; then stretch out his hand from below on the other side forming, and the joint will return to its place very quickly; and if it doesn't return through all these things that we have said, do this treatment: take a stake of two arms wide and three fingers thick, which has a head round enough to enter almost completely under the arch, according to this shape.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then bind the head to the stick under a shield so that the stick doesn't hurt the hair, then place the stick on the shoulder at an angle with the hair; and extend your arm up along the stick as long as possible, then tie the support on the stick, and the arm below the head, then put the arm on one of two thick rods, about four inches wide, and have your hand extended downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return to its place right now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is so, in whatever manner, if you need to place an equal thread on the shoulder joint, then apply plaster powder mixed with mill dust, along with incense and yolk butter, all over the shoulder and around it, then remove from the shoulder area, and retie above the plaster dressing, and secure the bandage again on top of the plaster, and hold hands to their necks, and keep the hands in this manner.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he eat a little, until the body parts are strengthened, because he will heal faster; and then increase his intake after about 5 days or 10 days, and move him; and if it is firm and not softened, then he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has moved out due to moisture that it has come upon, or for another reason, then you must apply three cauterizations to it, as is laid out in the section about cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift your arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder has been stretched or weakened; and know that the joint would never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations near the buttocks, breasts, or behind, are caused by hand thrust and stretching, and occur elsewhere too; treat until it becomes clear.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there's pain in the limb, and delays in movement, then immerse the patient in warm baths repeatedly, until this pain subsides, and returns to their original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	From the dislocation of the shoulder bone.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at several points and returns to them; it has been dislocated from all sides, as well as in front and behind. And dislocation isn't resolved because one can clearly see and feel it very well; and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the fire cautery with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly apart.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor reach its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in this way for abscesses to be extracted completely, because if they were extracted partially and left behind, it would be difficult to remove them; and by chance, it may not be able to be removed entirely, even when it's at the back. It is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and by chance it can lead to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And for its restoration if it can be returned to this condition, you should extend his hand with both of your hands; and his arms shall be spread outwards, downwards and upwards, and place the fingers towards the elbow along the inside, outside and underneath, then press the joint onto his shoulder blades or at the root of his palm until it regains its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if there is a dislocation at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand against itself, and places the cut on the root of the palm that was dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it doesn't return to its place, administer strong extension; and when you should perform the task, extend the arm and treat it accordingly, so that it does not move during extension; then rotate the arm from each side, once you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth around it; and when looking to join the joint with your hand, oil it to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly until she recovers; and when it is in place, set it with dry plaster and egg yolk, then keep it firmly, and raise the arm up to the neck, and leave it for several days, then gently release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, remove the bandage and leave it alone; and if you see that the joint does not heal well, reapply the plaster and the bandage again, and leave it like this for a few days until it is firmly placed; then remove the bandage.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if they feel pain after setting the joint back in place and it moves again, bathe and vigorously rub them well, pressing until their swelling subsides. Or apply a layer of greasy sheep fat to the joint for one day and one night, then wash with water; and when it starts to sweat, gently massage the joint, then put the fat back on, and then bathe again; and do this twice or three times, until they recover. And if you see that, place wet heifer's fat heated with butter over them, and apply it; if it returns to its proper position
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand dislocation recovers easily, more so than other joints, across the board. It is fitting to return it to its place as soon as possible, while it's still dislocated, in this very moment that it has been dislocated, so that the fingers swell up, or if there comes pus exudation hot.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And when you're setting the joint back in place, place your hand under a board and spread out the fingers of that hand. Look at where you put the palm on the appearance of the joint, press until she is fully revived all over. It's necessary to check if it is properly placed; then place the patient's wrist flat on a board during extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation occurs in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand's back on the table, and have them place their hand on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it's good. If not, if the application of plaster poultices to drain abscesses is relieving, and you leave him like that without starting again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put him in place after some days, if the joint remains twisted; and it does not harm him for as long as his hands are swollen, and cannot strain anything at all: then know that a nerve has been cut, or an artery; if there is no other reason than to apply a cautery against the danger, and by chance there is nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in place, then apply plaster as we have said, strain it and leave it for five days, then remove it and let it stay like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot be moved well, and there is no dislocation, with hot water, and rub until it becomes clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	No once are the shoulders reset from each side of the hand, no once on the back of the palm or the belly; therefore, keep the shoulder straight, and prevent dislocation in your stomach until it recovers. Then hold up the head of the shoulder, and push it towards the area that is detached; and leave it for two days, then set it evenly that day; and apply a bandage as we said before, and release the dislocation on that day, allow it to move, then reapply the bandage immediately; and do this repeatedly until it gets tighter, and do similarly if it is reset in the belly of the hand, just as you did previously until it heals properly; and similarly do so when it is reset from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	With the relief treatment for the heel, with the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the heel or the neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, if there is no treatment, because time speeds up the disease.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the symptoms for this are that the expulsions go against their will, they cannot hold them, and many times become softened in any limb, or both legs or two arms or one. And many times the ankle becomes stiffened at four places; the one that stiffens behind is called 'gilbositez': the cure when this gilbositez has come from childhood: if there is no cure or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And those that come from childbirth or impacts or similar things, the old methods of treatment told through large words, did not have any great benefit in all things; but I have shortened it according to my intention and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I state that when it comes to childbirth before the belly, there is no harm or health; and similarly, what comes straight to both sides, so only one who comes towards the back should be treated directly, as I say; and ensure that the patient's body is extended evenly across his torso in the first level equally, and that they do not suffer strain from underneath him, preventing injury; then stick a thorn into the head in the ground to form it, and another at the elbows, bind one string under the ribs along the side of the body, and the other at the hips, knees, and ankles; two assistants should know how to tie these strings, one by the head and the others by the elbows, between those two thorns; they must be firmly fastened, as we have said about the thorn, and the doctor presses his palms against the spine in formation until she regains consciousness.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it doesn't return through this cure, take a board of three arms long, and place it over the body part. If the patient is on their side, place the patient's head under the board, then put the center of the board above the spine; and set the nails at each end of the board near the feet, pressing firmly until they return to place; and if you can see it, do this even at the elbow which turns toward the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And if you plant two sticks at the head of the patient's arm up to their elbow, and under each foot as well, with an inch spacing between each stick in front and behind; then ensure there is a hand's length of space in each stick, covered by soil such that they do not move. And place one more stick diagonally on both sides from the elbow which bends inward toward the wrist, securely planted in earth so it remains firm; and put small sticks between these two diagonal ones, as long as an inch to bend the wrist; then fasten the rope that is among them at the wrist towards the head, and another at the feet near the other wrist, each servant bends their wrist throughout this process, and the masters ensure that the spine stays straight as we've said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when they are equal, if you place them with desiccative plaster and an abundance of egg whites, then you whip them, then you coat them with tallow from a piece of long table salt. That allows the area of the bumpiness and the healthy part of the spine to heal properly, then you tie it with thread as we have said, and the patient is treated with subtle heat therapy until it heals; if anything appears at the end of healing that was not healthy, then it's necessary to administer softening medicines and rejuvenating ones, along with the method we said before. And each time a piece of salt is administered, and there doesn't appear any indication in the lower spine towards the back, one should consider this as dislocation; because it's where the bone opens up, so you must not have presumptions: by chance it could bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	On the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only produce dislocations, not sprains; unlike other joints which can be sprained. The hip joint is dislocated in four ways: internally and externally, forwards and backwards; more internally than externally, less so in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation from within is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and opens more the diseased knee than the healthy one, and cannot make the diseased knee bend beyond fire; and because the diseased joints are swollen with pus all around, due to the joint being below an abscess.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the indication for him who is coming to danger, it means that this event is contrary to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs for him who is coming to what lies ahead, it means that his leg is well according to completion; however, neither doubles nor stretches his knee without pain, and if one tries to make him move forward, he cannot before and retains his urine, and swells his ankle, and when he walks, he does so on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs for him who is coming behind, it means that he cannot extend his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more bent than the other one, and the ankle becomes softened, and the shoulder of the arm is at its head under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The correction of this appearance of dislocation means that you should recognize if the dislocation is old and remains in its position, without any treatment; and it's not appropriate to assume anything.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And concerning those where the dislocation is recent, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hasten to restore the joint, and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it right and left; by chance if it returns, and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you should apply the strong minister and firmly hold the leg with both hands or with one hand that is tied to his knee; and another minister extends their hand over like this so they can bend their hands under their armpits, then drives them through with a single effort along the arm until the diseased part is lifted off the ground all at once, and remains hanging for a while.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension applies to four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is correct.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then treatment should be directed towards its appearance. When the dislocation is in the arm pits, it is necessary to place the patient on their healthy side, then tie around the root of the elbow, and the part above the armpit, then tie higher towards the armpit, and towards the muscle; then take hold of other attendants with your arms, and embrace the thick side of the diseased elbow, and extend it forward in formation: if it returns to its place now; this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot bind it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary to tie the two diseased feet together with a strong bandage under both heels and knees, and make the diseased leg extend two spans more than the other; then hang him by the head on a pole, and place two long arms of earth above. Then command one attendant to embrace the elbow of the hand, and have another attendant hanging with the disease, who embraces the shape of the hand, because the joint now returns quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations occur in front of him, if the patient lies down, as we have mentioned earlier for those with girth, and stretches his diseased limb properly from the ankle to the knee, and up to the foot too; then place two pincers, one on the head and another near the ankles. Then pierce one pin at the buttocks of the diseased limb in accordance with its shape; and wet cloths are spread around it to prevent injury to the patient, after which each minister is positioned towards him and his gaze set equal to his hand during dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If she returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place her on the table and press her in this manner as we have explained for girth issues, and let her lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when dislocations are in front, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg promptly, and according to what I have said; and place the pain of being on the bad side, then press with the other hand, and pull forward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, it does not suit to extend the patient's head down nor lift them up from the earth. Instead, they should remain like how their hip was when it was dislocated in front, just as we said about lying on both hips; and they should be lying flat with their knees extended just as we said before, and pressure must be applied at the joint table; then it's correct when the patient can extend their legs, and they will be level. Then adjust the thighs, put the plaster on, and hold it tightly with one band, so that the hip does not move. Rest for three days or four, then release them, and apply the plaster again; and if you see that they are even, apply pressure as before, and leave them for three more days; then release them and allow them to walk comfortably until their limbs have been strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From shoulder dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees can be dislocated in two ways: this means, internally and externally, and behind; and they do not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs for this are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their knee, and if they cannot reach their knee, you know it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is done by making the patient stand upright, stretching out their leg if possible, placing their back against your waist, placing their foot on yours; then take their kneecap between your palms, pull apart with your fingers, then bend both sides slightly at the knee joints; and have another attendant stretch out their foot as long as the knees return to their place, and the signs are that they comfortably bend their leg at the knee lightly; and place the plaster on, make the leg and thigh touch firmly for three or four days, then release; and do not disturb the patient's movement until the limbs have become strong.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not broken, then apply strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the thigh, until it is sound.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never properly set and never fully released, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle swells and tends forward to the part where it is dislocated; the return is swift, and one should gently extend its hands when it is merely being held.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, then have the patient lie straight, and hold them upright with their legs apart at the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left, twice, before lifting it upwards and firmly pushing down on it; do this again, as we have said, while pulling and moving the foot down. If it returns, that is well; if not, restart the process, for it will return; and if it cannot return in this manner, then have the patient stand behind their back with the floor, plant one leg firmly between their buttocks, and tie a cloth tightly around them to prevent any friction on the leg. Then trim the legs of the patient, and with others lift the foot when extended towards you or to your side, where they tie it up to the collarbone; then evenly extend each assistant's hands, and place the sandbag so that it is firmly between the buttocks for holding the leg as it is lifted; finally, hold the dislocation evenly in both hands, and with others trim the healthy leg at about the ankle, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at the point, then place the plaster and bind above, apply strength to shape, tie the limb to the leg, guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind, making sure not to tie too tightly; then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage loosens, remove the tension. Then, on the third day or fourth, let go of most of the movement, allow the patient to walk for another three days; and if it progresses past this stage, it is still not certain that it will no longer dislocate.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pus comes out, you should soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	From these two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both shoulders are dislocated, if they suit well to extend them by work, and this is a slight matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in neither the back nor at the feet, you should have the patient lie on their full length or on a table entirely straight, and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot until it returns; and when they are equal and there's nothing opening, place under the sole of the foot a table for two shoulders, then apply pressure and let them stay for three days, then release them; and make them rest until they recover.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Regarding wounds and dislocations combined
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and you wish to restore it, many times the patient dies: if not to be overconfident in treatment, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for long periods, and if you are not kind and merciful and considerate, do not be rash; at first use things that soothe the wound until it is bandaged, and leave the patient with God, if you do not see hope of recovery; and when you see hope, immediately set the member in place as you can, so that wounds are drained and heal; and when the member is in place, use things that soothe the wound until they heal, treat the wound properly using desiccated ointments; and if with dislocation there is fracture and small bones have broken out, fix them, and do what we have said about simple diseases; and guard against entering a path of fear according to what I said, for this will bring you to your Creator's will, and through knowledge arm yourself and care for your body.
Amen	Amen
