O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, dear children, I have completed this book which is the essence of medical knowledge, gathering together its completion through my explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to my vision that I would complete this task with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the art of hands is cultivated in our region and has spread everywhere, it has been lost and forgotten, and nothing remains from its original form other than small descriptions in books by the ancients that have been used.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And out of this comes error and vanity, and closed are the minds, and science is moved away.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I should renew the arrangement of this treatise according to the method of exposition and disclosure and abbreviation; and will come together the forms of the cautery instruments and other tools of work with the adjustment and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no skilled masters are found in our time, the art of medicine has been lost.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the one who intervenes to master anatomy science, as Galen says, so that they understand the judgment of limbs, their shapes and connections and separations of muscles, have knowledge of bones and nerves and blood vessels, and know the number of bones, the movement and location of veins, both mobile and stationary, and where the exits are located.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And as such states Ipfcras that the benefit with the cure is much, and with the medicine is little; in like manner in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We shall tell you in the introduction of this book that if one is unaware of what has been mentioned, they may err and deceive others; as I have seen many times with those who interfere in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I witnessed a foolish surgeon who cut out one of the lymph nodes or throat condition in a woman and cut into her neck arteries; because so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in an elderly man, and the stone was large; he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to draw out, and saw the position of the disease and the size of the stone, and if one had let me cut him it would have died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another scene where the cure took care of a duke from our land who had his leg broken, and with the breakage there was an injury; and the healers full of ignorance would bend the break over the injury according to strong will, and did not alleviate the injury in any way, and let it go like that for one term. And I commanded him not to disrupt her; and remained like that until the leg swelled up completely and the foot, resulting in loss.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was summoned to come to him, and hurried to come and straighten the leg; and when I heard it being dislocated so much that it became peaceful and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every passage for corruption was already confirmed or part of the body and could not be cured; and the process of corruption would continue within the member until the entirety of the limb was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And observe one other site where an abscess opens and gets clogged up, then inflames due to the wickedness of its owner's authority.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a cancer, when it is filled with melancholic humor and is in such a place that all can be removed from where it has become corrupt, then it should not be touched by iron.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And because of this, skilled children, you are required to know that the work of hands is divided into two sections: knowing that it has danger in multiple conditions; and I will show each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary that you keep this practice, so that no one can speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take your weapons in hand, and treat your illnesses lightly yet firmly, and use the best way so that through God's grace you come to health and be blessed; and leave unbearable diseases without complaint of healing; and remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can go from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galen advised in some of his admonitions: "Do not take false illness as a cure, lest you be called foolish by others."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters deal with fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and organize the chapters up to the belly; and describe the forms of instruments, and the metals of cautery tools, and all that is necessary for work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, as well as suction cups and wounds, and arrow extractions, and similar things; and the chapters are organized with descriptions of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters deal with restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are organized up to the belly, as well as descriptions of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Just as we remember our work, it is necessary for me to describe the quality of each aid and the harm of each constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and the harm caused are the longest word and most subtle science and the secrets answered. And many wise people spoke about this and agreed with it. And they were content with their words for me because I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery is universally effective for any constitution where it has substance, knowing there are two constitutions: this means hot constitution characterized by substance, and dry constitution characterized by substance.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the hot and dry combined constitutions, there was no agreement and they said that fire cautery is great help; and the other said the opposite: that fire cautery only works for diseases coming from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should never be treated with hot illnesses by heat or drying; and it's stated that those who argue against this claim that the cauterizing tool provides great help to hot and dry diseases that come into a person's body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the person and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true on many occasions through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every path, do not interfere with it unless he who has tried it does so, and who knows through long usage the art of cauterization, and the diversity of human constitutions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the manifestations and the time span; for other constitutions we have no fear, similarly in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the parts should resemble and agree with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know, children, that when a fire cautery is assembled, it possesses the secrets of treatments, and offers more benefit than a burning medicine cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and leaves no scars on the body except where it burns, and does not harm any other part of the body.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Hot remedies spread from one limb to another when applied, and cause diseases in limbs during healing; and by chance they move the disease.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, due to its height and because of the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this is what I have found through experimentation and the length of my service and study in the art, and it matches with the truth of things; and for this reason, I apologize for the length of speech, as I do not like that I force you to accept the secret associated with fire and the quality of work, how it relieves diseases from bodies, as the philosopher explains in demonstrating. Now receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, child, that they determined when the cauterizations should be performed, and studied them meticulously.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is applicable at all times, because the nuisances occurring are reduced by the aid of the cautery; and indeed, if the cauterizations are for necessary pains beyond which cannot wait until bigger maladies affect the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think like the foolish people do, child; for a disease healed by cauterization does not return. And they say this way: but it is not as they believe, because cauterizations are only medicine that alters complexion and dries out fluids causing pain, which are worth more than medicine for the quick increase of its strength, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And there exists no disease that comes exactly according to the complexion of the disease and its location, as well as its virtue. And they gather together in him the excesses due to the consumption of foods and similar things, if cauterizations are not administered within him where there is a lack of excesses and moisture, such as dense cauterization for pain, and similar things, so that this type of pain does not recur; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And not many people understand why cauteries are called the last of medicine, and this is seen; but they do not believe that cauteries can come after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it's said that cauteries are the last of medicine because when we administer methods of treatments in any illness and they do not work, then we administer our cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, clearly understood, cauteries are the last of medicine, not according to the understanding of people who simply say so.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The old ones said that gold cauteries are more effective than iron ones, and they stated this because of the quality of gold and its high substance content; and they claimed that the metal parts of the cautery do not cause corrosion, but this is not clear since I have proven it, and found that it does occur in some people; and gold cauteries work better than iron ones, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And still, when you heat the gold tool, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and soon cools down; and if you heat it too much; then send it to the fire; and thus there is enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And that's why we use our iron cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	So you should order this chapter on the shoulder joint until it reaches the elbow, because its visibility will be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	with an olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	A fire cautery is suitable for moisture and cold on the head, and there are two types that we apply due to an illness called 'soda', and because of many fluids that descend from the head as sweat, and ears, and due to a multitude of dreams, tooth pain and throat pain, and most especially for all diseases arising from cold such as paralysis, soda (or gout), apoplexy and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient's body should be purged by a dissolving medicine to modify the head. It varies between three and four doses or between four and five, according to what the properties and the temperature and the habituation of the patient can endure; then you make adjustments to the head of the patient afterwards.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place your hands in contact with each other and put your palms on his nose. Afterwards, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two nostrils; and let where your middle fingers go bleed, then heat the cautery which is called 'olivare', this is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put him in the middle sign of ink, and do as you descend and steady your hand little by little while turning; then lift your hand alone, and test whether the bone appears .i. sol small; and if you do not see it, continue with the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take .i. poc of powder, and apply a soft moistened cotton inside, put on top of him, and let him .iij. days; after that place on one part butter; and leave for as long as the scorching is removed; afterwards treat the wound with ointment known as 'tetrafarmaçon', until it heals properly.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if they said that concerning the old ones, that when an injury remains open longer, more purging occurs; and because of this movement helps.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that with these we should leave the cautery applied until part of the bone is burned, and then once this part of the bone is burned, it should be treated.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And it is said that one must let the cautery burn there, and press so hard against the bone as wide as a thumb, just like women place in their flasks when they use them because bodily fluids are forced out; and should one allow the wound to be long open; after this, one should clean and bind it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of using the cautery do not seem to me to be good for all purposes, except when there is a way for fear; and I think that I should leave them as they are; because the joints become weakened by continuous exposure to nature's solutions, as we have shown in other limbs; and even when the joints of disease are naturally weak, and my first impression of using cautery is more healing and effective for me, and with this method I perform work thus assembling health.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain occurs in the whole head and lasts long, one must use the patient's ears and pills that are called "cochies", and treatments for head and ear purification along with bandages; and if one applies the cautery as we have previously mentioned to them, it helps.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick is of strong nature and not too cold; then apply the cautery on top of the spot a little as we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After make the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, just as we said before, and do one more cautery where it is called 'vassel'; and take two levers for which you place suction cups; and lift your hand so that you don't go until the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of this further; and it should be that the cauterizations on the horns are more gentle than the one used to cauterize the middle part of the head, which is this shape:
dou cautere dou chief	Of the fire cautery,
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When suddenly the part of the head comes to have an acute pain, and the illness extends up until the eye, and the head is cleansed by purifying medicines, and other treatments that I mentioned in the division of diseases have been done, and none of this helps: then you do cauterizations according to two ways, namely with ague medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The fire cautery from ague medicine involves you taking a spoonful of garlic, and placing the peel and minced portion in two small pieces on each side of the head. Then conduct the temple or the part where the pain lies, in such a way that you can spread the garlic throughout the skin; when it is spread, cover well with this method and let it remain like this for 12 hours; then remove the covering, take out the garlic, and leave the wound thus for two days or three. Then apply a poultice of butter until pus comes out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment until it is clean; and if you see that you should apply some burning remedies as I have written or in the tenth treatise on burning remedies.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the shape of the cautery as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a bell where there is one and a half inches of curvature, and at its center has a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and keep your hand steady while slightly move the iron just a bit, until half of the thickness of the wound is burned; then lift your hand to prevent the artery from burning, which leads to an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing linen wadding, place it on the affected area for three days; then replace with wet cotton soaked in butter, and continue to treat the area with ointment until it heals. If you wish to cauterize this headache using the iron cautery which is called "cultellare", do it at its tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this headache that is not old.
de emigraine	Of a migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have previously described in the divisions of diseases, and you don't find relief, and notice that the cauterizations mentioned earlier in medicine do not suit it, then it is necessary for you to heat the cauterization called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and thus cut along a line half an inch long on the body, and move your hand once, and pull it so as not to touch the artery and that you stop at the bone; and be careful of the jaw that moves when eating, and let only the tongue move and avoid spasms in the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or if the procedure has great fear and similarly for those who do not know about it and are untrained; and leave the work halfway through; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding once the artery is cut, and show you its location in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cauterization does not suit the illness, and the patients are suffering, apply it in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you observe, administer the cauterization that we have said or chapter on extraction of the artery, with a two-bladed cauterization tool; and these cauterizations are better than the other one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from part coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain from cold affects the ear, and treatments have been applied using dissolving medicines and other procedures we discussed earlier in this section, if the pain persists, then apply this type of cautery known as "dots", following which is its usage:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the cautery all around the ear, or in both sides of it if pain is present in both ears, and move away slightly from the root of the ear after you've marked its position. Apply ten 'dots' on either side of each ear; afterwards treat until the site becomes healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Tortures that must be treated with a cautery are not from those that move by blood flow, as we have said in divisions of diseases; and do not make a cautery for the appearances coming from scarring and pus of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this type of torture that moves by water and from head discharges and gargling, and if it's not effective, then it is required that you cauterize the patient with three applications: one at the root of the ear, another slightly beyond the temple, and the third in adjusting the two lips. And place the cautery where health reveals itself, and cauterize right at the tip of the ear above a little below the outer ear's edge, and another at the temple as long as a thumb; and let the cautery burn up to halfway through the brain; and this is the shape of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the appearance of the surgical knife that we have described previously is a bit more refined, so it requires that the knives be somewhat thicker. After treating the wound as I have said before, until it heals properly.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When it comes to apoplexy being chronic and treating it as we have said, if it is not effective, and the patients do not have fever, then make four cauterizations: two on each of the horns of the head, and one underneath the head, and one at the part that's called 'vasselz' as we had mentioned before, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it in accordance with what we said previously.
de litargie	of liturgy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, you should give the patient large pills and brain-dissolving tablets; after that, remove the head of the patient thoroughly, and place the sinapic plaster on the back of the head as instructed in the treatment of plasters. And this is how to perform cauterization: do it just like I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it's healing like this, well done; and if not, do the following: three cauterizations on either side of the head as it descends to the neck, leaving an interval of one thumb between each cauterization. And treat it just as with others, and should you see that it has adjusted, and the patient tolerates this, then do a single cauterization in between; and if necessary, two more above the two horns, and treat until it heals. And let the cauterizations called "olive" be performed, as I have previously said.
de la froidor dou chief	from cold or injury to the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and what we have said before; after treating the head for the patient, then do a cauterization near the wound on the head, and on each horn, and one at the back and three below the spine of the neck; and if you need more than this, and the body is moist and the patient tolerates it, and the disease has spread, then perform four cauterizations along the spine of the back; and leave it until the deepest part is fully healed, then remove your hand; after that treat until it heals, and let the cauterizations called "olive" be performed which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	From the treatment of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should only use the cautery on those who are phlegmatic, and first modify the years of treatment and other remedies that we have discussed in the section where the body is large and suffers from hunger for medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it's a child who can't bear the suffering, make them gargle and chew, modifying the treatment often with good meats; after this, you should have their head in the middle, and I do one cautery according to what we said before, and one cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the body is strong and suffering, I give them cauterizations as I said for those who are paralyzed and have a softening of the limbs, on the spinal column both at the back and neck, and let the olive-shaped cauterizations be done according to the method that I've described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the body is a child's, I perform one delicate cauterization in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to the reason of melancholy are excesses or fluids corrupted and thickened, then the cautery from the parts' cautery as we have said to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if it is due to the reason of melancholy that these excesses are declining towards melancholy, and there is malaise from moistened organs in the body, then one should drink something according to which makes the brain clean, as was explained before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After removing the head of the body; after do .i. linen twists well made, as .i. circle, if you place it around the head; and let the body parts lie properly aligned and held firmly in all directions; then apply the liniment and rub with old bee wax butter; and heat it moderately on fire so that one can bear it; afterwards empty the circle from within through the head, and let it cool down; and do this to each part of the body once a week with another good regimen until it is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	If you see that the cauterization has been done by making points with the cautery on all parts of it. This way of cauterizing moistens the brain excessively; and then place moist cotton, butter, and gelatin fat upon it.
de l’awe des eulz	of the irritation of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When eye trouble first arises through the symptoms I have mentioned in the division, then begin and continue to instruct the patient on things that purify the head, and keep them away from all moisture, and make them sweat or bathe several times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding over his head, and have him cauterize in front of it, and make him receive two cauterizations on the two temples when the alleviation of the trouble is among the two eyes together, or if the alleviation is in one eye; then apply to every cauterization all the veins and arteries that are around the brain, and have them cauterized long according to the width of the temple; and guard against bleeding out, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it by applying pressure as you know how.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions using cautery, how to apply it; and never should one use cautery or burn across the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of both tears' courses
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed, and located on the veins, or across the arteries that lie beneath the apparent surface of the head; and one can see they are cold excesses of phlegm. So, I apply the cautery as I've described at the beginning of this section: .i. cautery around the eye, and .ij. cauteries on each of the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or burn across the .ij. bones; and if there is need for more, carefully apply additional cautery above the eyebrows with every .i. small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the paths of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you apply the remedies as we have instructed in the division, and if they don't benefit, then give the patient three nuts to drink; after that, have them drink their own urine, and apply a cauterizing agent or an olive oil-based cauterizing substance; and perform two cauterizations using the 'clavilis' cauterizer on both sorcis, slightly over the hair; and be careful not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cauterizer which is called 'clavilis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the wick of the oil has been softened due to disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cauterizer which is called 'olive'. Here is its form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that it is done twice by two needles as long as the needles are; and do not let go of your hand until only the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of hair that touches the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	None of the times has it been that the hair of the eyebrows turns to the gums and touches the eye, and in this case, one does the cautery according to two ways: namely by fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow long and even, then have the patient in a healthy position. Afterwards, on the paper of the eyes draw a figure that is as large as a mint leaf and includes the beginning of the sign between the hairs; then place damp cotton soaked with egg white and garlic paste on the eye, then heat the cautery which has this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you've cauterized on the figure that you have drawn a little bit at a time, such that the burn stays in one place; and signs of health are when you see the paper returning, and the hairs are raised to the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for three days. Next, place damp cotton in butter until the scab is removed; afterwards apply the ointment until it heals properly.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if hair growth starts occurring after this, and the paper becomes softened; then resume with the cautery on that same area as before. If hairs have emerged, apply the cautery until the paper rises to its natural position and is even, without touching the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of medicine that burns commands the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even. Then make the shape of a laurel leaf from parchment; then take French soap and living charcoal, each about half an ounce, and grind them well together; and prepare it quickly so it does not cool down, then apply it directly on the form like a laurel leaf, and place it on the paper under the eye. If the sickness lasts for one hour only, you should open in one direction, and if both sides are also affected; put wet cotton in each eye as large as an egg; let the patient's head rest on your hand supporting the medicine, press with two fingers and hold the rest of the face every time the patient feels the irritation from the medicine, because it feels irritation similarly to fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a while, if let the medicine sit on your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the irritation has passed, if you lift your hand away, and reward it if you see that the paper is lifted just as it would be lifted by the constraint of fire or incision; and if it's like this, then everything is well. If not, then apply more medicine onto your hand wherever the medicine hasn't worked yet, until your actions are even, and your eyes are at a proper point; then place wet cotton in butter until the burned area is covered, after that cleanse your hand of the ointment known as "dyafenis" and another one, until it becomes healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if it is necessary that you guard well in your operation by great caution so that no medicine mixes with the oil. And if the paper becomes moist after, and the hair pricks at the eye, then apply the medicine to the part where the paper has become soft from the proper clean oil; as you did previously; cleanse until it is healed completely; this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the oils of men vary in size and degree, and according to this be your constraints; and do not let the right way be answered by him who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	regarding the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then it is necessary for you to perform a cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in a healthy position; and scrape the temples of their head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or twist its head; afterwards put moistened cotton on the eye, either under an egg or from garlic juice; then heat the cautery which is prepared: and over the head as if it were the shape of a quill feather, place the cautery there; if you see, let it be pointed from one end to another, and if you can see, let it also be like a tent; but always remember that whatever is under should move according to your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is opened, and treat the infection, then dry it up; and if it is closed, open it again, and remove from the body; afterwards place the cauterizing instrument in a form, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part under the nose above the eye, so that your hands do not cause harm; and put the cautery into the grease of the oil, and let it be corroded.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to the start of the cautery until the bone, it would be well. If not, continue with the cautery once more and again as needed, and leave it for three days; afterwards place moist cotton in butter, and apply the ointment cure until it heals. Once forty days have passed since healing began, then apply corrosive water medicine until the bone is exposed; and follow the king's rule according to what he prescribes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a way to cauterize fistulas that none of the old ones mentioned. Understand what a fistula is and do as follows; after this, place one sharp camel bone in the opening, which has its form here:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And I do it to the size of three grains of poppy; and hold your hand or the camel bone firmly, and don't let the patient move, so that the melted wax does not spread in its own direction; and it is appropriate to put cotton moistened with butter or oil on the wax: the wax serves as the opening of the fistula, and the healing proceeds wonderfully through cure.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed through the cautery method that we have described, that is good. If not, then it should be treated with garlic, and restore the fistula to inside the body near the nose according to what should be done in its proper location.
des crevaices en levres	This translates to "cuts on lips".
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	This sentence translates as follows:
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds as we have discussed in sections, and if the treatment does not help, then apply a small surgical instrument according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And immediately place it in these wounds until the oil comes out; afterwards clean the wound with tallow until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or into the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and swollen and festered, eventually turning into a fistula; you should treat it as we have discussed in sections, but if this does not work: then you must apply a cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards remove the contents of the fistula, keep your hand steady until the metal rod reaches the bottom and towards the middle; do this once or twice, after treating as discussed for curative measures, until it heals. And if treated in this way, it is good; but if not, you should uncover the wound, remove the decayed bone according to what you find in your treatise.
dou movement des dens	of tooth movement
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth move,
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the moving tooth is fixed,
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes due to coldness, or there is coldness or fever, and medical treatments do not work, then it must have a cautery according to two ways: and the butter cautery and the fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery if it is like that you take butter from a cow, and the tip on a iron or ant's spoon; after take cotton and envelop around the point of a tent, and make the butter to cool down, then put this on the hurting tooth quickly and hold until it becomes cold; and do this often until the power reaches to the root of the tooth, and if you see wet wool and cotton in cooled butter, then put this on the hurting tooth, and place hot iron over it for as long as the fire goes into the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The fire cautery if it is like that you take a coal of iron or an ant's egg, and make it big so that the fire does not come to the pain in the wound; after heat up the cautery, from which the shape will appear later, and put this on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery becomes cold; do this often, for the pain will be relieved that day or the next. And it is necessary that the wound fills its mouth with good butter in the hurry of this cautery, and then pull out the iron; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And perform the cautery to your satisfaction, according to what you can do; and this is how a rod looks:
des scrophules	The translation for "des scrophules" in English would be:
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are due to cold blood and wet humours, and they don't comply with digestion by medicines, then you should heat the cautery as shown below. It will have two openings for the fumes to exit from the other side; and place the heated cautery near the abscess once or twice, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small, adjust the size of the cautery according to its quantity, and leave it like that for three days; apply moistened cotton soaked in butter until all pus has been expelled. After this, continue treatment with ointments and poultices until healed.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When moisture invades through the veins of the heart and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary for the body to be emptied first with diuretic medicines; afterwards perform the cautery at the root of the throat, and ensure that you do not come right up to the throat, but burn until just beyond slightly.
de la toust	Of the touch
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the diseases of the heart are due to cold moisture, and the body doesn't have fever nor dryness, and it's an old disease, then you should perform two cauterizations on their veins; and another cautery in between their buttocks under the breasts. Let these cauterizations be those called "clavile" according to the form mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see it, apply the fire cautery at exactly all points of the cautery called "poins", which was previously outlined in the sickness of ears; and let these 'poins' go up to thirty (30), or perhaps a bit further. After this, treat the area according to what was said beforehand, and set the cauteries for three (3) days following this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And these cauterizations are lighter because you do them three times in each area.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	regarding the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, bandage the wounds on his back and sides; after that, release the kidney inside the bladder from your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated internally, heat up the cautery until it has two points, as this is how it should be shaped.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And apply the cautery to the kidney until it reaches his side, and bring together four pieces of the cautering; and for this, use the cautery that has three points, because the pattern of cautery consists of three pieces; and the nerves follow the delicacy of a tent and this is the shape of the cautery that has three points.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And no time is attached to this first nerve, because there are seven cauteries involved.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the cautery on it, grind with it; after that, allow the patient to rest, and do not let the limbs be strained for too long until they are well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is released from above, where little has happened, then make a cautery on the thickness of the main cauterizing rod, or in many parts by touching. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient's body is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the weeping cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old ones said that we should do the tearsin fire cauterizations from the roots of aristologe, and in this way: take a root of aristologe long, the longest you can find, and dry it, and also make it as thick and as long as your finger; and put its juice in oil, then hold it to the flame, and cauterize once between the elbow and neck, and twice smaller ones slightly down on the part that is under the beard; and three times between the fifth rib and the sixth, descending a little behind; and one time near the heel, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and four times at the sides of the ribs below the cauterization that is between the two shoulders; and do not squeeze your hand, rather act freely as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And it was said by the old that no man uses a feigned fire cautery at one razor cut, and they heat it and put it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and if there comes relief from the pain, as we have mentioned in the abscess of the liver. But in this work fear arises or the patients die now, or a fistula occurs which cannot be cured.
de la mice	"De la mice" is French slang for "from the mouse," referring to something that is coming from the mouse (as in the small animal). In English, it could translate roughly as "from the mouse," though context would determine its exact meaning.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of the mouse in those we have spoken about regarding the divisions of treatment, and it doesn't improve, then apply three methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	There is one way which is as follows: make three cauterizations, or four, drawing them according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver that we mentioned before; and do not hasten your hand across all the cauterization, and let the patient be soothed by their back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another way of cauterization is that you heat the cauterizing tool with two noses, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift out the kidney which is at the mouse's place, or where the pain comes from the left side, and let it be lifted according to the heat, according to the shape of the body, and the cauterizations should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After I place the two heated needles until they are pierced from the other side, and then remove the cautery, afterwards you will have four. And if you see fit, sear with the entire cautery on three needles. After treatment when it has expelled pus over a long time, and this counts as much as any other treatments previously mentioned.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	The fire cautery is not suitable for dropsy, except by the method called "asclytes". When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in sections and your treatment does not benefit, then you should make four cauterizations around the anus, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place under the breast. And let the cauteries be well close to the spinal keur.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After letting the cautery heated for a long time to burn thoroughly, do not stop the cure after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and both sides of the burnt area would join together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly is like a knife as we have demonstrated before; and the one for the back should be round, according to what was put forward earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	regarding swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the joints swell in someone who is hydropic and filled with yellow bile, it is necessary to apply a cautery on the back of the foot between the first and second fingers. Then lift your hand using the cautery without turning. And do not go too deep inside, otherwise it would remove the yellow bile, and use the cautery according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After performing on both legs at the tip of the knife cut; and place the cauterizations along the length; each one in front of the knee joint on one leg and the other behind, down the middle of the leg; leave the cauterizations to burn for a long time without treatment until the wound heals; after curing the other treatments as we have said.
de la menoison	of memory
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the stomach trouble is caused by cold or moisture, as long as the retaining and digesting powers of the stomach and intestines are overwhelmed, and cannot be cured through usual treatments; you see the patient suffering greatly with greenish fluids, if you apply a large cautery on the stomach according to what he has said before, or stomach cautery, moving around the stomach. And four more cauterizations inside the subtle area around the mouth for each of these, and two subtle cauterizations at the elbow joint, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, apply the fire cautery to the base, and one cautery on each navel, and two small cauteries on the stomach under the large one, because the treatment benefits when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	regarding the treatment of hemorroids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the hemoroids are located or have a foundation, they may be old and consist of large cold moist putrefied humors, and if treatment does not prove beneficial following our instructions in divisions, then apply cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that one is fully exposed from under the buttocks gradually and in triangulation, and one above the anus. Four times;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think that the stomach is chilled and the food doesn't cook properly, and you see swelling of the abdomen, then apply one large cautery to the stomach as was mentioned before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen using all the clavicle; and leave the cautery in for a long time. Afterward, treat the affected area until it has healed properly.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the soreness which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat the swelling called "thelul", heat up the cautery until it looks like a rasp iron, and then place the entire hot end on the thelul; and leave your hand as close to the cautery as possible near the vein's origin, from which blood flows. Do this once or twice, and if there is more swelling, apply each part of the treatment similarly as we have said; after the treatment with beneficial ointments until they heal properly; and if you apply a large-hot cautery on the area affected by "alchatim", it will provide greater relief.
de plaie mal curee	of improperly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear surgery or incision, as we will describe in its proper place, if such a disease should occur that can only be cured through cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When there is no opening and it is aged with festering corruption and moisture, if you want to test this thoroughly with a tiny probe, be sure that you understand the size of this opening. Heat up your cautery until it seems ready, and apply it into the fistula according to its depth, then continue heating the cautery until the diseased pus is burnt away, one time or two times or three times depending on your need; and beware not to burn the nerves and large vessels. If the fistula went inside the body and reached the intestine, be careful of this situation, and do not perform these actions in a healthy part of it, remember that you mustn't harm others; after the wound heals until it is clean, and once pus has been drained completely for a long time, then you know that the healing process is complete. And if the pus hasn't drained fully, understand that there's still corruption in the fistula, and bone tissue has been damaged internally; act accordingly on one of these situations we shall mention in its proper context.
de la maladie des reins	Regarding kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When abdominal pain arises from the kidneys and large wind movements, it doesn't affect men equally, so it is necessary that you apply a cautery on both sides of the kidneys, as well as to the wrist area where we have previously mentioned; if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three applications of the cautery in a line, and they will provide more assistance.
de la vessie	From the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is thick and moist due to heat and moisture, so that the kidneys retain urine, then you perform a cautery on the lower part of the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, and one each side, and let each cautery be as long as one finger; and you do one cautery behind the back, or two if needed; and make the cauteries in a V shape according to the form previously described.
de la marris	From the mare's tail
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the mare's tail is cold and moist, and it does not allow anything to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends delay; and when they come, they give off great pain: then you must perform three cauterizations inside the vulva, as we have said or in relation to bladder cautery, and two cauterizations behind the back; and make the cauterizations in a V shape, as we have said.
de la hainche	From the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the cavity of the hip, and because of this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and you find the legs from their origin visible, then it should be that you apply a cautery on the cavity of the hip with a mark resembling a circle for one firebrand. And you shall stand in front of the limb within the cavity as she curves, so that the cavity is inside the circle; and if your fires are like those where you have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if such fires are not available to you, then make three olive-sized firebrands that are as precise as all your stones, and perform the treatment until it heals.
de la dolor de la hainche	The pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain occurs in the buttocks area, and this is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient's treatment follows what we have discussed about division and cure procedures that are not effective, suggesting an old disease: then it is necessary for you to cleanse the body of thick fluids using foul-smelling pills or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After you perform the cautery; and regarding the method of cautering there are two ways: this means combining hot medicines, and fire cautery. The fire cautery has several methods, among which one is like this: you should make three triangular cauterizations according to this shape, and each makes a good depth and large ones, and leave an equal space between each cauterization the size of a coin, and these are olive cauterizations; one should never make a cauterization in the middle above the buttocks area, because there are four following this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the circle-cautery, as we have described before in the dislocation of the buttocks, should be used; but do it this way so that all the buttocks are contained within the circles, and all parts of the keur (or area) is heated.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is how it is done in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach to the thigh or leg. And if it comes down to the thigh and leg, then one applies two cauterizations there where the patient says the pain stays, and one above the ankle, four inches up, on the left side a bit; and may use surgical knives for this, or burn away thick skin around the knee; and if the patient feels that the pain extends down to just below or near the foot, then cauterize there where he senses the pain with three points or four at the point of the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if more work is needed, do so; and if it turns out that the pain is spreading from the knee towards the thigh, apply a cauterization using either an incising or circular tool. Make sure to take great care in all your cauterizations, ensuring you don't stop too soon when burning nerves and large arteries, and refrain from causing more harm and constriction to the patient than necessary.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen many who applied the cautery on the ankle down to the foot, and they burned it so much that the leg became swollen all around, and likewise the feet were affected, becoming painful and putrefied. After this, the person died due to an abdominal distention solution.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pains are in two parts together, make cautery on one and on another, according to this manner. // And the surgeons say in the cautery of the hip, about which is mentioned here, this is the way: shape a piece of iron into two similar items each as large as a small finger or a little less, place them head-to-head so that they are positioned side by side and from one to the other for an area equivalent to the size of a pea; ensure that these pieces are interlinked in both parts and resemble knots. Also have two well-made iron pins; this is its shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it is completely red and emits steam, then place it on the afflicted area of the hip, and twist it near to the healthy side. And apply one cautery treatment once and allow it for three days; and after this, cover it with butter, and keep the wound open long thereafter; continue dressing with ointment until it has healed completely.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim states that we use very little of this type of cautery for the fear of his judgement, and there are few who actually use it; yet such a method is among the better cauterizations which one can endure, and leaves scars where they occur.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or from percussion or due to too much evacuation, or due to similarities of cold matter spread out, none of these appearances warrants cauterization, because it is someone who came from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the patient has been freed of rotten pills or other appearances, and that one applies it to the back, where the pain is located, three lines marked with a cross, and in each line according to its strength and quantity what the body can endure; and do the cauterization according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see fit, apply 3 or 4 cauterizations at the middle clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often affects children, and the signs of its beginning are that they suddenly become weak when standing up, with fear; and you find an inflammation in the last spinal bone at the back and a similar appearance to other spinal bones.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you notice it being treated, if you apply the fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	So that the fire cautery touches each part of the spine equally. And if you see it, apply the fire cautery to the inside of the spine using a point. Two or three lines deep, and have the points close together. After that heal it until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to use the cautery in a way that causes pus formation which could involve nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	Of the pain in joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain arises due to moisture spread throughout each body member, and when pain comes from the feet which they call "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold reasons and can be cured with medicines, they are treated in this manner: make the fire cauterization inside the joint of the foot, and have these olive oil cauteries take this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need to touch on the foot of the patient, when they are applying fire, do it with a complete cautery saying "point". And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, when this happens many times, apply the fire on each knee. Three or four times over every part, throughout the olive oil cautery; and if you need more, then do so, but make sure your hand stays inside until the heat of the cure is burnt away.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cautery that we have told about in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make marks inside the bend of the elbow two lines wide; and if there is no pain left on the back, make marks on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and take good care with the patient and give medicines. For if you treat him well and purge phlegm, he will be cured with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the scrotum
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture occurs in the lungs, and the bowels descend into the kidneys - it is novel. It's necessary that when you see them to cure, do not disturb that day; use things that allow the wind to leave his belly so that the intestines descend from his belly; after let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to shave his armpit until the bowel are repaired, then remove them with your fingers, and mark with burning under the rupture on the bone of the knife, and in every sign make it similar to half a circle above the heart. Then heat up the cautery which has this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Till it is white and smells of scents. Then remove the bowels up to their position; and have his ministers shave his hands so that they don't turn back; and work well on his thighs with the patient, and put 2 pillows under his thighs and another one under his buttocks which shaves his hands; then place the cautery at its sign throughout your hand, and keep your right hand straight as you reach until you touch the bone, and if you don't reach the first time, continue again once or twice until you reach to the bone; and be careful so that the bowel doesn't escape when you do the cautery; don't burn it; and ensure this way patients' skin does not get burned or any other damages.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless. It's necessary that the children's cautery be subtle according to their size and also large people should have theirs as large as their measure; after three days treat his armpit with butter until the scab comes off; afterwards apply other ointments until he heals properly, and let him stay on his back for forty days so that the wound is well closed; and it's necessary that his wounds are treated long enough, so that bowels don't escape when he wishes to walk in chambers.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, he should wear a well-made bandage and do this for forty more days; and with good rest, he should work little and avoid overfilling himself in drinking or eating, and overstraining his voice. And when he follows this advice, he will be fully recovered. And I shall explain the treatment of trimming next in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other bellies and are visible, and you see that they are not growing any more, you should apply fire according to their size with the cautery, and use one-third of the charcoal; after that, treat it as we have said; and none of the old ones said that one must cauterize at the angles of the cautery to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	The first sign is when the skin begins to swell and make a line across the width of the cut, and another down below, and move your hand along the entire iron stick for cauterization. But the initial applications are lighter and moister.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in no limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being hit, and if this pain lasts long, and medicine does not cure it, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and the cauterization should be according to the length of the member, its smallness and weakness, and its effectiveness, as well as its location in twisting and its pain. If the first application of the cautery is good, that's fine; if not, apply another one after it. Such situations require that the cauterizations affect the limb closest to them, for which reason you should perform cauterizations until the illness is cured.
de meselerie	Of cautery by fire, command the ill person to allow the hairs to grow long and even; and if they poke at their base, hold the eyes still so they do not move until they grow.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The treatments are aided by fire cautery many times and especially illnesses that come from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy. If you see it being treated by cautery, beware if the illness is at its start, and when it is cured according to what we have said in this section, so that it doesn't recur or remain and you doubt whether corruption has spread throughout the disease, then do this five times with fire cautery: one time on the head up to where the nose meets it and another towards the forehead at the ends of hair; and two times on each of the horns, and once behind on the chin. And keep your hand such that the cautery comes close to bone, until the scabs come out completely so as for the vapors from the large humors can escape. And cauterize it in the middle following as what is done before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the cautery is everywhere scattered; and it clearly disappears, then it's appropriate that you apply these cauteries that we have spoken of to the head, and one cauterization near the nose, and two cauterizations on the spine at the neck, and seven cauterizations on the spine at the back, and one large one at the throat and another in front, and two on each shoulder; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful about the nerves that are at the heel bone, do not burn them. And no single cauterization is done over the bone of the wrist, and another over the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more cautery I apply, the more help it becomes for the patient, and they benefit from it; and know that patients do not feel pain during cautery as healthy ones do, because their bodies are already thoroughly corrupted. And you should have large and small cauteries according to limbs and joints, just as you will find in instructions on iron tools. After the cure, dust the area with flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it heals properly.
de enfleure	of inflamed
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When inflammation appears in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but not healing, then I apply cautery to the limb according to its size; and let some of the cautery enter slightly into the redness of the disease. Then treat it with ointments until it heals properly. And every time one makes a cautery, on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and in this way the inflammation is removed; and still, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	Of cautering with fire, command the patient to allow the hairs to grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is grown worse, and medicine in its natural form is of no use, then apply cautery from a small fire to some extent, according to the quantity of the root being treated, until the pus is removed and its color changes; then cleanse with flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from chicken and blood from duck, each using one part; mix all together, then wrap in a cloth, and leave on the affected area until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	Curing syphilis with cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When the chancre begins to develop and you see it start, if you stop it by observation, use a fire cautery that appears like a circle. And around its circumference apply the cautery to the chancre all over. And some say that one should also apply the cautery in the middle of the chancre; yet this seems not well to me because I fear it could lead to ulceration and corruption, which is something I have already seen happen many times; and a more rational thing is for it to be cauterized around the edges with the fire cautery called 'circule', as we have said in the context of using cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of swelling that cannot die.
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it doesn't die or due to the excess it causes or because of the age of the sickness when it is old (meaning too old) and he/she has little blood, or because of its length; and you see that it needs to die quickly: then use small cauteries around by applying them in various places; afterwards leave it like that. For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce through completely to all points of the cautery, if you heat the cautery as described:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the middle of the disease which is called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced through the heart, and use such cauteries that the sick feels outwardly in such a way that the progress of the putrefaction be checked. After the cure until it's healed perfectly.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure by fire using iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another method for disease involves one referred to as "corrodens", which is nothing else than a limb deformity, causing the limbs to be affected similarly to how dry twigs are burned. If you notice this disease in someone capable of undergoing a cautery procedure with fire altogether, then apply small and large iron cauteries according to what suits the area where the illness is present; after burning all around until you eradicate every corruption, leave nothing behind so that no part of the corrupted remains. And then let it be for three days, and while the ashes from the fire burn on your treated limbs with oil until the burned areas heal away and any remaining corruption. After the use of ointments causing growth. And if after three days you see that healthy tissue does not grow, this is well; and should this not be the case, restart the cautery procedure where there remains corrupted on your limbs. This deformity is sometimes cured with medicine in place of fire cautery; yet still, fire cautery proves to be more helpful, and I have already spoken about the cure for ague medicine within a specific division: take what you need from it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	From stones that come into the kidneys
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often times when stones pass through the kidneys, a disease occurs which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large lump that causes pain in the kidney. The cauterization for this disease happens in two ways; namely fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they are converted beyond the body's borders, and often happen in the hands and elbows, it must be that you bring forth a hot cautery; and do this manner: take an arnica stick or iron, or a goose feather, and place them on the nail and thorn, meaning for warts; and place the stick where the skin reddens fully around it, then add some hot water, and keep your hand tightly held, pressing your hand back so that the edge of the stick touches the root of the nail, and then find the path of the hot water deep down to the root; and allow the patient a little exposure to the hot water for an hour; then leave them like this, and it will uproot all at its roots. Do this one after another, until you have treated every single one in your body, then cleanse of any growths that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble from cold or nerves, or from the quartan fever or other conditions, it is necessary that you perform this treatment: four to five hot iron applications on the spine of the back; one application between each vertebra; one on the skin and another under the stomach with an olive cautery; if this doesn't stop the trembling, hasten the recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	The pus-filled boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	No matter how they appear on the surface of a boil or pus-filled pustule that comes from large decayed materials, it is necessary at first when they start to appear to apply cauterization to each tip of the pustule: a fine firewood stick of myrtle, whose point gets heated by fire, or from a long root of aristologe, or with the lens-shaped cautery. And it should not be cauterized in the beginning when they are starting to appear, according to this method, and it will not grow pus forwards, but will relieve the excess causing them and make them well; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there would be great flows of blood from the artery that is cut during the wound or when incising an abscess, and similar occurrences; and it's very frustrating to have to deal with bad smells.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And still, when this happens to any, if you hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it not too tightly until the skin is soothed under your finger, and no drop leaks out; then heat several olive oil cauteries with both small and large sizes, until they are all red. Then take one or more according to the size of the wound and the place where the artery runs through it, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the skin is completely cooled.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are done, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop performing this one after another until the skin is cooled down completely; and be careful not to burn the nerve that lies beneath, and so no harm comes to the patient; and know that when the skin has receded from the artery, one cannot cool it properly themselves even if the artery is large, unless you do this through four methods as we have said: by cautery, or extraction when it has not been treated yet, or by strong winding of a thread, or by medicines applied which have the power to cool blood; and then tie and restrict it accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers it will apply stretching or tightening of cloths tightly or place burning things upon them, or other similar actions, if they do not gain from it then they did not.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they have no sight or medicine at hand, when faced with a wound in the vein, they should put their index on top of the wound as we have said, and stretch it so that it remains stretched above the wound and above the vein; and not move it, but moisten it with cool water often until it's very cold, until the blood is frozen, thickened, and remains stretched. And make preparations in advance for cautery and medicines for what they need.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of treatments for amputations
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases concerning which it is necessary to apply a cautery of fire, or hot medicine, and we discussed their causes and tools, forms of cauterization; I completed that chapter up until the feet, and now I shall proceed through this chapter on my own path as these are found more readily for what one desires.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And just as I begin this, it is necessary, dear reader, that you understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first treatments of cauterization, so great caution is required for these.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there are many times bleeding when opening veins and making incisions on abscesses, and treatments for wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar matters; where there is doubt and fear, and it leads to deaths of some.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I advise you not to engage in folly. For many ways of people come into cures. Some come from those who are so troubled by their illness that they die lightly due to the anxiety they find in their sickness, and the severity of their wickedness; and for these, one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And among these are those who understand its meaning and say: "Wait, I am brave"; and the illness is spiteful. It would be inappropriate for you to agree with those who come to your door in this manner, but show greater caution towards your honor than your covetousness, do not act foolishly but wisely from those about whom you are certain, and about whom you can take advice; use prophecy and indication in the remedies of your ailments until health is achieved; this will help you gain good reputation, fame, and long memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, Our Lords give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have commanded this chapter in devising through chapters, according to what is before or the chapter on cauterizations, which I have devised from head to feet, for you will find it more easily of that which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease comes very often during childbirth to children, and when the mother constrains too tightly the head of the child; and no time does this come about because of a response that one might know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than children, and among all those that I have observed, their death was hastened by it; for which reason, I think it's worth trying to divide the work into partial treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw an infant of theirs whose shoulder was filled with water, and the head swelled each day until it could no longer bear it; and he believed so much in the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled all over the bone under the axilla, between the heart and the bone; and the works are such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you cut open through the head a large crack; and it goes as long as two hands, as long as the moisture flows; and see this shape of the spasmula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more concentrated, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in a manner like a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is inside the bone, and you see the edges of the head opening from each part, and water jumps out when you press it with your hand internally, and this does not stop: then it is necessary to cut through the head three cuts in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, extract all moisture outside. After holding the cuts of bandages and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave like this until the fifth day; then reset it, treat the wound by tenting and applying ointments, and allow the head to be held equally afterwards, finally have the patient consume dry meat from a small source of moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to look at where the opening of the abscess lies, and the position of the water; for it's never ahead, it's never behind, it's not on the right side, nor is it on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then the area where the abscess opens, and the space of water, and make the cut according to your ability; and be careful not to cut the artery; and watch for a stream of blood, so that the patient dies from the flow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of cautery by fire, command the sick person to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to any illness that is called "congestion" as in the eyes or at the anus, and this disease is old, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then the last resort of treatment is cauterization using this method where one severs the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	So then, if you cover the eyes, the patient should be placed on their back; after that, rub their head with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then pull out the mass from its throat using two cloths. Then look where the vein lies, and determine the position of both ears relative to the eyes, making sure they are in line afterward; then mark the eyes with a cross, then cover each eye with a sharp spatula about half a inch thick until the bone is reached, and this should be done by applying pressure over the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, pinch the pus at the artery and over the vein above, cut also like two inches through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein has been cut, if you push the blood continuously outward from high up.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery doesn't open upon pressure, it is necessary for you to measure the length of the space of three inches, then puncture and go until you reach the bone; and what needs to be removed from the blood is six cubic centimeters, and by chance a little more or less depending on how the patient can endure it, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if there's still a bit touching the bone directly below, if the incision we make doesn't come up against it, then compress the wound tightly and tie it, and apply ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	Of cautery with fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old age comes, and acute coughing, due to the moisture of tears and the heats in the temples and lower back being long established and similar things, it is treated using methods of medical cures, but none of them provide relief. We should extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extraction is such that the patient should be made to feel through their temples, and hear the artery which opens at the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and responds very little except in some people who are too cold; and if it responds, then compress the neck with cloths, then rub him with a rough cloth, and immerse his head in hot water until the artery clearly appears. Then take the form of the instrument from which this is done:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then gently burn the leather until you find an artery, then pull it upwards with forceps and remove all the meshes that are attached to each part; and if the artery is delicate, pierce it at the tip of the hook-shaped nail. Then cut out that section according to the size of two bones. For if it isn't cut properly, blood will leak everywhere.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw blood from two veins up to three inches; and if the artery is large, it must be tied with two strands of a strong silk thread for at least four centimeters before suturing the wound, so that pus does not come out before the healing of the injury, nor cause further bleeding; then cut off the excess between the two threads in this moment. And when you can see, if possible, gently apply the cautery from the cut to the bone as long as the bones are cut; and this is the finished work, provided the patient does not have fever and he has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauterizations help to finish off infections; because they provide more assistance in dealing with moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	In the extraction of arteries, you must fill the area with old cotton and place it over well-made tents; when they are released from their binding, apply dry medicines that create pus and tents until they become clean. If there's no artery cut, treat as you normally would, hurry to cover with a cautery or use the space with vitriol on your hand so that the cut is cauterized; if you do not have this present, place ice from your hand onto the area until the cut freezes and then rinse with cold water until it stops bleeding, applying pressure as needed. The one that becomes wetter in the extraction of the artery should be burned by a cautery trenching through two parts, but ensure the trenches are well spaced to retain longer heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have .i. inch of space between the two knives, and then when you have made a small incision with both edges, place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, and cauterize the wound in two places; and keep them far apart from each other because there is no welding from this cautery throughout; and this is how the cautery works:
des larmes	Of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are flowing through the veins located above the testicles of the head's chief part, and no medicinal cure helps, you see the skin turn red, and feel or perceive like tremors; and in places that are moistened and damp such that the paper hairs fall off, and heat up the papers, and burn from the heat of the tears, there is need for this kind of treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they named the old one "the wounded healer", and you should do this to the patient who has this illness: let them have hairs or front hairs, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to its length; let one of these cuts be as long as two full lengths across the forehead in a downward direction until it reaches the nose, and the others two at each side of the forehead above the papers. And guard against making incisions into the arteries located above the papers; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound have an area equivalent to one and three-quarters times the length across.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have a piece of sponge prepared and some cloths ready to wipe off the blood, then use an acute pipette from two parts by which this is formed:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is made behind the temple up to the second incision; and charbroil all the area between the two grooves completely to the flesh which is above the bone. Then make another cut from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then extract this pus-filled content.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If a tool is placed in the first groove which is called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, but not sharp on the other, it's shape is:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the cutting edge of the tool towards the fatty layer under the skin and the rounded part towards the bone, and insert it as far as you reach to the middle groove. And remove all vessels that descend from the head along with them until the incision is continuous up to where it opens on the skin, and then make further cuts in the middle groove up to the other groove; and then extract the blood evenly, and express the wound for the blood taken; then put a piece of old cotton in each groove, and place wet cloths soaked with wine and oil and garlic above them, making sure no pus leaks out; and on the third day release the bandage, and apply large amounts of water and soap to it, then continue treating it with ointment with basil and rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When it comes to sudden catarrh that is habitual, and you see the eyes heavy and small, and weaken the vision, and burned papers; and the hair falls out, and one feels feverish during the aches, and the body shivers; then know through these events that those substances and that phlegm do not come from many veins, and the wet cure that is being used, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And you should instruct the patient to sit up straight at their forehead, then make a large incision through the forehead, and another of considerable size. Start from the left temple incision to the right temple, and ensure your cut goes down to the bone; and move your hand away from the temple nerves that move during meals; when the bone is revealed, allow all the blood to escape using a sponge, then cleanse between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton, and linen material. Then cover with moist cloths soaked in wine and oil, and avoid letting an abscess form. When it's removed, it should be rubbed on the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with desiccating substances that promote growth.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of the wheat flower, and four parts of the root of wormwood, and make them into a poultice; and apply it to these wounds to promote the release of pus everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of ear perforation
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that chokes in the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or mine stones or similar things such as iron; or seeds, such as peas, beans, lentils; or draining substance such as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it chokes in the ear with a piece or other matter that doesn't fit into the ear or grows in the ear, place the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, apply drops of violet oil or saffron oil; then proceed with extraction; and make him sneeze with pepper, and stuff his nose when he sneezes, and insert pieces of cloth or wool into the ear; and hold the ear above. This cure often works; if it doesn't work, apply extraction with fine needles, as described below:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it leaps like needles, that's good; if not, proceed with extraction using a slender needle of small curvature; and if it doesn't leap through this, take an arachnid hair and pinch the tip of its hair or the ear petal strongly, and apply wax to the inside of the hair thread so that nothing can enter with the thread; then shape the force, as we have said many times; and if force does not come in such a manner, grab from here and take its other ends, put into some no instrument is suitable for this purpose, and place a little cotton inside; then press the lump onto the stone or anything else, and pull with force.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it doesn't leap through all these things that we've said, hurry to puncture the ear in such a way that pus can come out and spasms occur; and the method of incision is such that you first make a surgeon's incision on the tympanic membrane and remove blood according to the measure of its virtue, then have the surgeon sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where fat hangs down; and let the cut be like a moon until you reach the stone, then break the bone according to your ability and suck it quickly into your mouth; and treat until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's grains and they swell up, you should perform extraction; and if it cannot come out, then use this small spatula according to this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And prepare to make an incision on that grain. But do not do this when you think the grains are wet due to ear moisture, until you have done many pieces; then extract them with delicate forceps and a suction tool, as we have said, so that the extractions go smoothly.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In water, then, when they sneeze in the ear, so that the patient uses their first cough reflexes, and widen the ear with old cotton. And stay seated right by that ear where the water is. If it sneezes out through this, it's good. If not, take several stones according to the length of your fingers and gently, then heat them a bit on fire; and place one or two pieces in their ear, and draw away from his foot from another side, and strike with another stone against the stone that is inside the ear; and don't stop doing this from stone to stone until all the water sneezes out completely, and thus it sneezes out completely; and if you see, take one reed, and insert one of the heads into the ear, and the other head with fire until the hottest reed is burnt; then redo several times until all the water comes out completely, as we have said for stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the beast, if it's of small size, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in division; but if it can be felt, go for extraction with forceps; and this is the easier thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from ears, when you are treating them as we have said in the division and treatment of distillations, if the cure does not work, it is necessary that you look at the ear to sunlight: if no worm appears there, if treat it with sharp needles, and if nothing appears, take the form of this:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it should be tight below and wide above. And use the finest tip of your tool according to the amount of suffering caused by the malady, then form each part completely with the rod; do this often until all the worms have come out. And if they don't want to leave on their own, numb the inside of the cotton swab as I've said for stone extraction; and if they don't come out forcefully as we've said, administer distillations that the old ones have proven in worm removal, and you'll find how to treat them with distillations; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear using this tool, according to its form as you see it:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be made of silver or a small piece of iron below with two small openings for distillation and above to cover for the purpose of distilling inside. And to press within the distillation use a properly made tool from iron for this task, and take one comb and wrap cotton around the tip beforehand. Then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the cotton, and let it be in the ear; then push all the cotton into the comb completely, and press your hand smoothly until the oil is distilled or excess from the ear; and listen to the maladies inside, and let these distillations be heated for a moment as one would when they are being distilled into the ear; and make sure it's not too cold because medicine wouldn't work as well otherwise.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of ear piercing
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any loss in their ears; and this same thing happens with injuries to homes, or a fetus being born inside the ear, and these piercings occur once within the ear if one cannot see it; and never does more than half of the loss be seen clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes from within, if one cannot see it, is of healing damage in various positions, and concerning this thing that we can observe, you should place the ear under the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent pus, as the work has formed with this substance:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be careful to cut forward and behind evenly all around, ensuring not to damage the ear; if the pus is from a birthmark or a part of the ear, then use fine pins to gently pinch it until that part of the flesh has been completely excised.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the operations are made inside the ear, take a thin and light rasor, sharpen it slightly in fire, then place it near the ear. If you feel the operation causing discomfort to the ears of the patient, make a slight incision and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a patch according to its size around the protrusion, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment in the wound.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Continue this for as many days as the wound is healing, or take a patch and moisten it with rose water, and apply powdered vitriol. And if you see swelling in the ear, it is necessary that you remove the patch and replace another one that is wetted with a cerotic made from roset oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse an sponge and dip it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and use other remedies that remove the bleeding which are treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the ashes of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	In the month when they come from papers with hairs that are wet and dry, it is necessary that you spread them out using tweezers and forceps, and cut off its roots with a scalpel; then place sulfuric acid on the area.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if you don't remove it, then cauterize with a small lens cautery, and after the incision, make sure to remove the cauterizer; and many times repair, because no part remains from its roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots get burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Regarding the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times in papers, there are some things that seem greasy by their form and hardness, and because of this, it is a disease called "snow," which forms a large pool of moisture on the paper. The procedures are as follows: watch if the snow melts from one side to another; this is a simple thing to understand. Do it broadly at first, then lightly cauterize each part, then pinch and cut it off. If you cannot cut it without piercing the paper, or if it causes any pain to the patient; if the tear is large, with stitching present, treat until it heals; and if it's small, don't exert much force, because the ointments will heal it quickly and keep the wound from getting infected.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the snow falls down into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper and place the snow on a pin; then cut it off from both sides. And if the paper is moved away by incision, this does not cause any harm; and when the snow has been cut off, drain out the salty water and treat the wound until the injury heals so that the patient recovers healthily.
de la graisse des eulz	of the grease of the pus
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a grease that seeps onto the sheets of papers above, and this happens more among children than adults, and causes much to their eyes, and it comes to them in tears at mornings, and they cannot look towards the light of the sun because tears rush into their eyes; and for that reason, they lie on their beds immediately, sleep upon them, and have their papers wetted by their eyebrows from the exinach which opens up in the eye. And when you press your hand to it with your fingers and feel exirnach between your hands.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of the work is that the patient places their head on your healthy place. And then take one linen sheet and set up a tent in manner of a circle according to the quantity contained by exirnach from each part, then put it on; press with your fingers from one side and another so that exirnach gathers within the circle; and cut in the center of the moisture in the knife make a slit of size, and should not be larger than the wound when you do for opening veins; and make the leather around completely until you see the exirnach coming out from the slit according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then remove it all as one piece of linen cloth between your fingers at the front, and twist your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread out; and make sure you do not get stuck in the slit, that you come up to the edge of the knife right up to the eye, that you do not hurt it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the incision does not open at the start of the wound, increase a bit the wound gently until it opens; then stretch it as we have said. Then soak with moist cloths and water, place them on the wound, and hold in position with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are people who grind grain and put it on to corrupt the moisture that has remained. Then treat them until they become sane. And if an abscess forms at the wound, then the treatment with healing plasters continues until they become sane.
des poilz des papieres	"Des poils de papier" translates to "paper hairs". This phrase could be used metaphorically or in a literal context depending on the surrounding text, possibly referring to fine, thin materials that resemble hair.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When the papers are born with hairs adjusted other than naturally and they grow old, they harm the eyes and cause illnesses such as habitual tearing and paper putrefaction, and albugine, until this is the cause of destruction to the eyes; and then one must cure according to four methods: or by a fire cautery combined together, or by medicine according to what was discussed in front or chapter of cautery, and it will be made either through incision and sewing, or with ligatures, according to what I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It must be that you put the head of the eye in your health, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it's good; if not, take one needle with two threads above; and do this across the edge of the paper where the hair grows under these hairs, and pull both threads across the entire paper, and turn it with the rasp; then cut in that part beneath the paper, beneath the adjusted hairs, all along to the large tear up to the small one; then remove one thread, put a small cotton tent and a silk cloth underneath the paper, then draw on the paper a figure like an oak leaf, as if of laurel leaves, and it must be that the figure is according to the amount you see raised above the paper which is placed under all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if there is need for such that you must use a large amount of paper according to how the paper has softened; then cut along the entire tear over the two lines that you have marked, and start from the large tear up to the small one; and should there be one of the cuts near the natural hairs in their growth stage as wide as a root, then insert the needle into one of the corners of the eye, then scrape it all off; then join the two lids with a sewing of a needle with two fine threads, and remove any blood, and allow air to dry the excess thread on both eyelids up to some sticky things if you see them being made; and if this is not so, then do not worry about it, then leave the stitches and threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without a stitch with dried and tightening substances, because the paper recovers from the healing of the wound and the joining together of them, but the stitches are irritated (as they say the old ones), and this is work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is another way: and it is that you mark the paper with a shape that is as like a leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at three inches measured according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut those on top evenly according to the shape that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you don't have the ability to hold the forceps, and the thing isn't even, take one thread with two needles, place it in the shape; and put a second thread under the large cut, and the second thread under the small. Then lift your hands evenly, and lift all the skin over what you've marked, as we have recounted, then stitch together the two edges of the wound, and treat until it's healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with ointments and similar healing substances;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And it often happens that the paper hair turns to ashes: if you should use what we have instructed for incisions; but the stitch is more artificial in both cases.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of canes follows this form: and you should convert the paper and cut it inwards according to what I have said, then make two canes by art, and two fine threads each as long as the length of the paper and as wide as its thickness; and take two heads from each part; then assemble them smoothly on what stands up above the paper of the eye, and draw together those two canes from the two parts. And leave them like this for a few days, and the skin that is drawn tight will shrink and harden and smooth out, until it escapes by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it lingers, and if the patient shows any signs of strength, then treat until they are healed; and when the wound is stitched up, and if the paper lifts and no longer allows hair to grow; this is the form that you will make the two canes according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work consists of such actions as you need to take: grasp a slender needle, and attach two strands of silk thread that are delicate and fine; then join the limbs together, tie them both neatly, and make the lengths of the threads about a palm long. Next, prepare one more fine silk thread for short use, and bind its top with the thread; then place the patient's head on your healthy side, and let the sun illuminate it because this is a subtle and small operation; afterwards, stick the needle into the root area where hair is attached until you pierce paper quickly while lifting it above the natural hair. Then pull out all the hairs up to the line, and bind them again in that line if there are two or three or four or more; finally remove your hand as soon as all hairs appear from every part of the line with the natural hair still attached.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the operation has been treated properly and no hair comes out with it, then pull out the line from underneath until you have pulled all the thread that was ordered, as long as the line can be seen through and past the edge above; then pull out the line and the thread, and rest the eye for two days or three, until the hair has grown back in its place and a new one has formed. And if the hairs are small, accompany each with one longer natural hair, and leave it attached to that or let it be left there, as long as it grows out straight, then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the infection of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease, called 'aleacrati' or 'putrefaction', affects the eye, there are two ways it can happen: one naturally and the other unnaturally. And it occurs suddenly from a wound, or from surgery or a cautery, and through similar incidents.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the way to treat this in the eye is that you cut through that seal, and open up the eyelid, and put linen strips inside it, and keep it sealed until it heals; and it should not be used in treating the eye with things that dry out and restrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but use things that soften instead, such as fenugreek; and washes of water or vinegar and linseed oil are cooked, and apply butter of garlic to all the oils, then wrap it in a strip, and heal it with these actions.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment are that you must be cautious not to seal it back up in the same shape as before; and these treatments we have spoken of only apply to the remedies for this disease, so they do not return in the same shape as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	The fluid that comes into the ear
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease which is caused by a foreign body truly called 'axacrati', and it is natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds, cuts, cautery, and similar things; and the way this enters the ear is that you take an awl, in which there are two threads, and insert it into the flesh, and have the needle pierce through to the left lobe of the ear so deep as possible, making the threads go into .i. inch of the flesh; then the flesh goes up over the entire length of the awl, and the opening is about .i. inch wide at its widest point.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is appropriate, it's good; if not, take a knife and put it in the cut, then turn the paper, and make two cuts inside the paper; and there should be two cuts at each angle of your incision you have made, so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has non 'two griesche'; then remove this flesh according to how thick its edges and cuts are from where it touched the paper, then join back together the two removed parts with a thread; then apply the cure as we have said for medicines that soften, and bandages, until it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make a full-cut along the hair where there are papers, and according to what was stated previously; then cut between the two leaves of a book, as I said before; and must perform the work in accordance with the shape of the disease, for it varies much in form, and the doctors should prepare all tools so they can return the figure to its natural shape; and even the patients themselves, according to what they need regarding treatment and instruments across various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	right away from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this stitching occurs on someone's hand in such a way that the paper above is sewn with the white of the egg, and cannot move or do its natural tasks, then it is necessary that you place the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and stretch it with tongs, until you get to the subtle spatulate at the tear which should neither be too sharp nor too deep, so that the patient does not suffer from the spatula being too sharp and irritating their eye. And make your incision, then scrape off this combined piece lightly, in such a way that the paper regrows according to its natural shape; and heals all of it, and do not use any salt water in the eye once, and rinse with gentle cool water, and clove oil; then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and cover the eye with wet wool. And after three days, use a colander and other sowing tools until they are all healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the eyelid
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the eyelid is in two ways: it is nerveous and resembles one hard tendon, and another which isn't nerveous, but seems like a frozen white moisture. When touched with iron and cared for using pins, neither can be done; both similarities start near the large tear duct, grow slowly and slowly until they cover all vision and light, and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of incision is such that when the patient places their head in its healthy position, then they operate the eyes; and lift the eyelashes with your hand, then place the edge of the nail using small pins, and extend it above. Then take a needle, and insert two hairs from a horse, or cow, or ox, and one strong thread; and double the needle point slightly and pierce it in the nail, and poke through all the way with the needle, and tie the nail with a string and place it above, and scorch along the entire length of the hair line that follows under the eyelid and the hair until reaching the root near the tear ducts, leaving only the very fine inner part of the eyelid untouched by the thread. Leave the natural membrane of the tear duct area intact so that no body's tears come through the incision as usual; and the nail is extended at just the edge of the nail bed, and under the thread, exactly like what we have described. Then the scorching should cover all the inner part of the eyelid from this point onward, forming:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the cautery doesn't touch the fatty tissue and doesn't damage it. Do not puncture the eye. After making an incision, pour a small amount of powdered sulfur into the wound, make a bracelet from silver nitrate, and let it stay until another day; then treat it according to what is required until they are well.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not sensitive and you can't push in the needle, many times this nail-like appearance needs to be treated with medicines. It grows just as I described in the division section, and if you see it become thick, then the eye feels ill due to the disease, take the cautery lightly in a sharper way according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And cut the nail slightly upward, and if you see that it doesn't thin at all and it presses on the reason, then drip silver nitrate from your mouth into the eye, and also use a red bracelet and sulfur. Keep this on until another day; then start the next treatment according to this same process, until all is removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes your sight, like pus-filled sores, then proceed and start by treating the pus-laden sore until it's clean. Once it is cleaned out as much as possible, resume the work procedure as before, until it's cleansed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if there appears the flesh from the eye in your sight by great harm, you should suspend its use and take a part of it but not all at once, so that no tears come forth; then apply red balm to your eye which is made from stibium.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Eyebrows of some men do not grow at all from birth; they cover the eyelid and stay close to the paper, seeming like a rose made of wax; and veins are such that when the patient's head is in good health, then the eyebrows form themselves. And so this happens with every segment of that flesh according to what suits it, and you hold it up with strength. Then cut out the first segment of flesh, and go cutting until the end, and watch not to wound the eye during surgery; and make sure your incision is as small as we have discussed in the operation on a nail and the delicate parts of the body where one removes a bone, just like how it's demonstrated after this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is completed and all flesh has been removed, use oil of garlic or distill it with red cordial medicine which seems like corrosive remedies, and place a cotton on the eye that you can cover with an egg, so that there's assurance of pus formation; and if nothing stays there, and the without shoes is on top, and you suspect of pus heat, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with things that soothe it. Then return to your operation as long as it's healthy, and thus make many segments heal under this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless, it is necessary for you to treat each weak eye of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in iron operations; and do not let your hand enter any of these operations until you see that this member is suffering from this operation.
des voines des eulz	of veins and eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	If the veins around the eye are red and cover it, allowing vision loss for several days. Then, at first, you must observe if there is anything wrong with the eye itself; other diseases besides sebel do not exist here. Therefore, treat as follows: instruct the patient to place their head in your direction of health, then suspend those veins up to the thirtieth degree according to their intelligence, and let the thirtieth degrees be delicate and double in this way:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two veins of thirty-three degrees each in one row, according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then proceed to treat those veins delicately, and let the blood flow for an hour after another treatment, until you see those veins move out of the eye; and be careful not to damage the eye with the ends of the spatulas. Perform this operation at noon in front of the sun, and be very vigorous in your work so that you only remove those veins; and when you have completed this task, apply a collar of green and red distilled liquid to dissolve what remains due to sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you don't have the ability to do all of this at once, create a poultice using things that soothe the pain from the eyes and leave it for several days until the pain is alleviated and the fear of an abscess has been confirmed. Then continue in this manner as described previously until they are healed; and this is how one uses strength:
de la fistule de l’oil	from the duct of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The treatment for what is called 'arissati' (a type of fistula): when you treat it with a cautery and with hot water according to what I have explained before, and if it does not heal, then there is the place where you incise in front of the abscess, at the point it should die, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you will see the decay and blackness, if you take it with all the tool used in its formation; and call it 'hard head', and made of iron as large as one big spoon, and pointed like a file according to the present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on it the part of the corrupted bone, then press your fingers on it, and squeeze a bit until you know that this decay has stopped; and do this several times, then restore that part with medicines that have been dried.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	When these joints are fused, and the flesh begins to grow, and the body of the bone is fused, and remains like this for 40 days, and does not heal and becomes abscessed again, if no bad events occur, then you know it has healed. If not, there is only another way: to bring back the fistula to its original position according to this form; and when the bone is exposed a second time through iron and medicines, and once it is exposed, take one nail according to this form, and fix the iron joint at three angles, and make the shaft as thin as possible until you see like this:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place your hand on the bone under the eye, and keep your hand away from the eye socket. I. Poc, then continue moving your hand all around until it pierces the bone and you feel the pain through this motion if your hand stays near your nose; and then return to applying dry medicine as I instructed you to do, and when the flesh begins to grow and harden on the patient's face; if something lighter appears at the site of injury for the sufferer.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye opens completely and nothing comes from disturbing the heart or diminution, it is necessary that you tie the sufferer's head; then heal them, then place suction cups or pincers without causing pain to suck, then apply on the eye. I. The preparation made of cassia, aloe, incense, and sarsaparilla, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with strips and pieces of cloth; and the way of the cloths is that you take cloths that are quite soft, double each one in four layers, and then place them one after another according to the amount the eye needs. Then strain it from above with a hard bandage formed, and repeat the suction cups to suck without causing pain. Then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if your strips loosen, then continue straining as much as necessary; then remove the strip after day and night, and if you see that the eye has healed, it is good; if not, then repeat the plastering, cloths, and strip again until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	At the rupture of the vitreous membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When tears come in the vitreous sheet, then opens and comes out strips like pieces of paper so as a resin seed, and is observable; thus if you see this covered, the operations are such that you prick at the root on one part below up to half above, then prick another hole with a double thread at the end of the tear; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position. Then cover the other side with the double thread and tie some part of the vitreous sheet together, and tighten well, then remove the needle and place wet linen over the eye with plenty of egg mixture; and let it be as long as the thread breaks along with the sheet, then treat the eye with comfort remedies until the wound heals. And none of these times should the wound be restrained by the sheet from each part of a circular piece of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the eyes show significant symptoms, if you puncture at the delicate membrane that passes under the eye, and remove the moisture and descend the sheet beneath the eyes, and do so immediately; then strain until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the flow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease known as 'alcunnati' is not due to an oil that has been assembled in the eye, resembling water flowing down, and it is not water; and the appearance of the work is such that you make the patient sit upright on a bench or chair, then take their head between your hands and move them until you see the oil coming up above your eyes; then it should be applied and not descend and be removed with lightness, and observe the oil's contents as they were originally; and if it does not descend immediately, know that it is water, and if the descent of the oil doesn't occur as planned, this follows our instruction. Then make the patient sit between your hands, then take a fine spatula and perform on the corneal tissue .i. inch along the continuity of the conjunctiva with the corneal tissue and crown, until the oil has discharged; and when it has discharged, distil into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey, then apply another treatment until it heals.
des aigues de l’oil	From water in the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have the signs of fever in division and what needs to be pierced; you must perform this according to health. It is necessary that you place the patient between your hands, outside light by the sun, tie the healthy eye tightly and firmly; then place the paper on the patient's hand where the eyes are on one side or on the other; next take with your right hand (where the eyes are on the left) or your left hand (where the eyes are on the right), the instrument called 'almagda'; then place the tip of this instrument underneath the crown, about the size of a hair's breadth in that part below the eyelid to the minor tear duct; next force the 'almagda' tool vigorously and twist your hand until it pierces the eyelid's paper and feels that 'almagda' comes to the void thing; and the measurement of the path of 'almagda' should be equal to the length of space which is from the pupil to the end of darkness; this is the crown of the eye; if you see bone through the paper by the clarity of the corneous cloth, then place the instrument until it reaches or touches where the fever lies, and express something out one way after another. If the fever descends now, you will see the patient in front of him and the tool on his eyelid.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a short rest. If the fever returns by the second path, apply force with the tool and when she is installed and no longer rises, gently remove 'almagda' twisting your hand little by little; then replace in the eye a little of the powdered gemstone essence, and remove that eye outwards. Then place at the bottom of the eye ointment or wet wool in rose oil and abundantly in egg whites, and bind with the healthy eye. Thus, those among us who are of our time, let's use a comfrey paste with plenty of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if 'almagda' cannot enter the eye through its hardness, because there are certain men who have too hard eyes, it must be that you take the tool called 'alberit', which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce only the conjunctive part, and don't go too far forward, but make it about half an inch, then insert some alum, as we have said; and after completing your work, provide one anointing agent, on which he sleeps on his back for a week. And remain entirely still, eat light meats, and do not move his head to the right or left, tie him according to his position until the third day; then release him in the same gloomy house and test his vision, make sure he can see things clearly, then put him back on his chain until seven days have passed. And it should never be that you perform this during the process of healing or after an incision now, but you must do this because the pain will increase rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	When dealing with abscesses, you must release the eye before the seventh day, and use an ointment to soothe the abscess; and when it is relieved, then release the sight and place on his face a piece of gold for covering one day, and be in this gloomy house. And then leave the house slowly, and adapt him to his surroundings. Know that no students should interfere in such cases.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Island, who told us that there they used alum powder, through which water is extracted, but still I never saw anyone like it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in old books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of the magd, because those who do not know them see them; and they belong to a mare properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And these are the head of their kind with the same subtlety, and the rear at three angles away.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh near the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	No matter how they are born or where they originate, various sorts of horned flesh (chars) exist. Some resemble scorpions with the shape of a bird's foot; and there are those that have horns extended in length with a reddish color, while others have horns of good color. For those chars that are reddish in color but not excessively long, it is necessary to place the patient between your hands facing the sun; then work on their nostrils, sprinkle the essence (oncine) over these flesh humps, and remove them; subsequently, collect what you can withstand at the subtle sharp point of the spatumile from one side until you know that this flesh has completely hardened.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there's no remaining thing that we can't cope with, when you open it all together with two fine light instruments, and ensures nothing is left; and if something isn't surmounted or has pus oozing out, then the surgeon should operate according to how it should be done; and if it's malignant pus, act quickly and apply cautery until the pus becomes thickened and all the muscles are healed; then pour out water or let the air in or use wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And when you sew it up, and if the moisture reaches until the palate, know that it's healed; and if moisture doesn't leak as it should, then there is new flesh forming in the bone above, with the surgical tools not coming near to cut: therefore, one must force .i. thread of linen somewhat thick, and hold your hands firmly, ensuring each knot has an inch or less spacing between them; and place that thread through the hole of the patient while making sure it's at their nostril's reach, pull the thread gently until it passes from the nostril into their mouth; and this method is often done with children in schools, and it's a simple task for someone who wishes to do so. Hold the head coming out through the nostril with one hand, and the other head coming out of the mouth with another hand, making sure you know which comes next when being guided by us standing here. Do this until you see that the knot has corrupted that flesh, then pull the thread, drain blood, moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and sew it back up again as before; do this for .iij. days or more, until all the pus is corroded from the remaining flesh; and then place a clove of garlic into their nose for several days until it heals, and if any need for drying medicines exists, use them; this is how to purify the head using the surgical tool where oils and dried medicines are distilled in wine.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And use it made of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and guide it in the same way; and if you see fit, then make a closed cane, and fill the surgical tools to purify the head; and hold one hand on the head when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the neck to the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease is born at the nose and grows and becomes large until it is visible to look; and for this reason you should begin by cutting it, and treat with bone all together, then place in him the fire cautery or hot medicine; and if one delays in cutting when it is large, beware if it is hard, of changing color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron at all as it is an abscess that has grown inwardly; because when you cut it even once, it causes great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is touched by heat, not by changing color, and you see that one can cut everything off, let the patient relieve and cut the head with fear, and treat him with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose has been cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Know that when incontinence of urine comes from one of these internal organs, it benefits little, for not all people. Thus, if this occurs to none, then observe whether the wound is fresh over its entire blood; and then adjust the two lips towards a stitch, then treat until it heals entirely; and if the lips are already dry on both sides, you should sear every part of their skin until they heal, then join the two lips together into one stitch, and hold them tight, and dust with dragon's blood powder mixed with incense; and place the powders over a plaster piece of strong or other soldering plaster, and leave it until it discharges on its own, then treat with ointment until it heals entirely.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the stitch is such that you unite the wound: either with needles, as we have said in regard to stomach stitches; or with thread, as I have instructed.
des apostemes des levres	extracting from the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the work of this chapter, there are often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
de la char des gencives	From the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times it begins on the attached gum flesh, which the old would call "albulus"; you should hold this with your forceps and cut to its root, allowing blood or the blood to flow. Then place under a vessel of vitriol powder, or other drying and restrictive powders; if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times happens, then cut it again upon the second occurrence, and cauterize it: if it doesn't return even after the cautering; these are the forms for treating such.
des sordens	Of cauterys made with fire, command the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their root, hold their eyes steady so they do not move until they fully grow out.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Many times teeth and their roots are gathered at the head of the teeth, between the mouth and gums, with unattractive and rough scabs present; and often there is a black tooth and citrine tooth along with worms until corruption reaches the gum, causing tooth decay. If it means that one must let the patient lie in your hand, and his teeth be at your service, take out any teeth or scabs while nothing remains.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you treat the tooth because of its pain and it takes time to remove as much as possible, do not stop early; one should not let any residue be left behind. Because this material is so high up that if there's any leftover from the extraction process, it could cause issues.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Therefore when the patient is forced to endure treatment, you must be certain of their tooth. Many times during this suffering, the patient perceives pain and believes it to be a toothache, so they extract the good tooth; but throughout this process, the pain does not diminish until all the bad teeth are removed, which has already been proven in our medical knowledge; and when you are certain about the tooth causing the discomfort, it's necessary that you sear inside the tooth with a hot spatula for insulation of the gum from every side; then move your hand or use your fine tweezers right away at first try and attempt until properly dislodged; then firmly secure the tweezers in place; have the head of the patient over your knee, keep it still so that it doesn't move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After removing the right tooth without breaking it, and if it doesn't fall out spontaneously, take none of these tools and insert it lightly in each part, and move it like you did at first. And if the teeth are pierced or fractured, then it's necessary to fill them with wadding where they're lost; and if you gently extract them with tweezers, do not break them during extraction; and be very careful when working around the gum tissue for tooth removal.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And you should carefully ensure that you don't break it and leave a part of the tooth, which can cause the patient more severe pain than before due to the sensitivity around the root. Be aware not to do this like ignorant doctors who in their haste and boldness break everything at once, and do not bring about what we have advised; but let this illness come back many times through the operation of this great disease by the roots that remain or from breaking the tooth itself, as we often want it to happen. And when you remove the teeth, wash your hands with wine or vinegar and water; and if bleeding occurs, which is common, then coat your hands in vitriol (sulfuric acid); and if this doesn't work, cauterize them.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the tools, which you are to use for pulling out the teeth first, should have long points and large handles, so they do not double when you pull them out; and these are their forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them have large parts that do not bend during pulling, and be made of very strong iron, and have teeth to hold the movements.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains during extraction, it is necessary to put moistened cotton in the mouth with butter for one or two days until the teeth are dissolved, then use tweezers called "algefi" which make the head appear like a surgeon's beak; and they should also be made just like a file, this is their form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to emerge with all these claws, it is necessary that you uncover the entire flesh right up to the root, and insert the instrument which is called "althali", meaning palmache, as depicted here:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be fine and thick so that it does not break at all, and if the root jumps out through this, it's good; if not, use all your instruments, as depicted hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you assist with this instrument which has two points, as depicted here:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are placed according to the spacing of the teeth, and this instrument that seems like large pliers, as shown here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this tool not be able to break it, and know that few tools of bone exist; also other tools, which are not counted; and the skillful surgeons find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their operations and diseases show them. For there are parts of diseases where the old did not teach any tool because of the diversity among these and if one breaks part from the carriage or others' bones, or if it rots, then they search for the tools that suit him, which I have said, and assist with gestures, as this is their form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And may they be large and well held to hold the bone so that it doesn't escape, but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it's small, then find all of this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and the shape is ugly, especially in maiden women, you should know if this tooth was born after another one and it's not in its rightful place, and one cannot pull or grind it: then extract it; and if it's next to a tooth, take this instrument that has this form, which resembles two small beaks, and is sharp from iron on the tip.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the file slowly in my hands for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, so I file it from half a file as it is shaped:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and similarly like the file used for making needles; and grind the tooth slowly gently in my hands for a while, until it doesn't move till it finishes; then make it flat at the end with all kinds of smoothers, if it's too sharp and it irritates the tongue, so you need to smooth out the roughness until it is even, so that it doesn't irritate the tongue nor spoil speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth boils
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the tooth in front of the gum, by percussion or by strike, and if the patient cannot press against what they eat that they do not defecate, and you have cured them with restricting medicines, this does not work; so it must be restricted with a golden thread. Since silver threads become green and decay, but gold never decays; and choose the size of the thread to be neither too small nor too large, according to the amount of space between the teeth; and if you see that they are aligning the teeth, take the thread and two buns of it between two healthy teeth. Then place them against the diseased teeth, as long as you can see clearly until a healthy tooth from the other side appears; then repeat this process up to where your covering stops, and pull your hand subtly and carefully, ensuring they do not move at all; and bind it onto the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut the threads with pincers, and join them together, placing them back between the healthy teeth, and put it in such a way that it doesn't irritate the tongue; and then leave it like this tightly as long as it can stay. If it loosens or the threads break, you bind it with another thread if it can sustain and serve for its entire duration, and this is the alignment of the teeth and the pattern of joining two healthy teeth with two diseased ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is dislocated, you put it back in its place gradually, just as we have said; and do not interfere with any forceful attempt which isn't cautious or endures pain, and each time one does not make the shape of a bone tooth of a cow, and then place it at the spot where the defect exists, and bind it like what we have said, and it stays and serves for as long as possible.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	covering the wound on the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	No instance arises from knots that come off the tongue or nature, which we are born with; or by accident of healed wound; and the operations are such that you work on the mouth for the sick person, have their head in your hand, lift their tongue; then cut out the nervous ligament along the wide part, until the tongue is released from its position, and if there's hardness or swelling, and it's due to sudden wound healing, if I cut off the hook and cut through that connection; and ensure that the incision isn't too deep right at the start because an artery might be nearby; and when you're done, lift the head up until it’s pinkish and calm, then put under the tongue a linen bandage; and rub the sick person every night so that the wounds don’t heal. And if blood bleeding occurs, put vinegar inside the head; and if the nose doesn't drain, cauterize it with the slow cautery device which suits this best; then treat again until they’re healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you notice it's of color or blackish or hard, so that the patient doesn't feel anything, don't touch it because it's gangrene; and if it's turning into phlegm, and there is moisture, then cut off the hook, and make a thin incision on both sides, and relieve them from both sides; and if the nose doesn't drain in your operation area, put vinegar over the burnt spot until it's healed completely, then continue with your operation as long as you're using force; then lift the head up and wipe it with oil, and treat again until they’re healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	removal of abscesses from the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	No matter how often blisters arise in the throat that are called "godath," and they're properly termed as two almonds. When you treat them, just like we've said in the division, if they aren't healed, be careful: If it's an abscess with a small opening and is slightly colored, do not touch it with steel. And if it's red and has a big root, do not touch it with steel either, because of blood flow issues; but let it bleed until it stops, then you may remove it, or it would break by itself; and if it's white in color and the root is thin, prepare your instrument to cover, but first check that the abscess has cooled off and is calmed down. Then have the patient sit near the sun, their head in a healthy position, let them open their mouth, and have the surgeons hold their tongue between their hands, pressing the tongue all over the instrument until this shape forms; and use silver or very thin iron, just like knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can't you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the thimble and place it in the almond, then pull it down more than you can; and pull nothing from the strings with it, then cover it with the instrument until this shape forms, resembling some forces; and always let the head be bent, one after another, and are very sharp, and made of iron or silver:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, take tongs like these instead:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And make the incisions on both sides and name them. When you have completed one of the glands, complete the other in the same manner, after which gargle the patient with hot, then cold water and warm water, as long as bleeding occurs, then continue to gargle with water that is hot or pomegranate seeds that are cooked, or bay leaves and similar things until all the pus has been drained. Then proceed with the treatment once it's healed. If any other abscesses develop in the throat besides the two glands, then treat them accordingly as the two glands would be treated similarly.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, specifically a small one. I had almost entirely closed the whole throat, so much that she couldn't breathe through the blocked passage and also couldn't eat or drink anything, and she died if she continued like this for about one day or two days. The abscess was so high that it had pushed four bones out of their places from the neck. I hurriedly acted immediately, put in a spoonful into one area, then removed the lump along with a large portion of flesh; afterwards, I filled her mouth and pressed her tongue; subsequently, I inserted a spoonful into these abscesses, and took back only a small part, and out only came a bit of blood; thus, she was relieved of her blocked throat. She began to drink water now and then wine, and I didn't stop treating that abscess over a long time; the abscess grew again and filled up the space I had emptied until it became very large; then, I supported her and cauterized inside her throat: she stayed like this without growing worse; I left these parts, and only God could do anything further after me.
de l’uve	From the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the head of the eye ascends and becomes red and long, it's called "perpendicular"; and if it is somewhat swollen and spherical, it's called "eye". When it has been treated as we have said in division, and the treatment doesn't help, and you see that the discharge from the abscess is calming, and it is subtle, then you should take it; and the one that is spherical gathers together and isn't long; and it is blood-filled or of yellow color or black, then you must avoid making an incision on it. For there's great danger to the patient. Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, by its swelling and lengthiness, you should make the patient face the sun, and press their tongue against the instrument we previously described; then insert the needle into the eye, and drag it down, and take it with two of the instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two almond-shaped glands. And you mustn't remove more than necessary excess beyond the natural limit; because if you remove too much, you can irritate their voice and speech; and after making an incision, use what we said about the incision of the two almond-shaped glands, and treat until it heals. And if the patient faints from removing the eye, then you should apply a method against its fear before cauterization treatment. And the manner of cauterization is sharp. And let the patient's head be in your state of health, and then press their tongue against the instrument we mentioned in the cautery chapter, and fix it with a lively hot coal, so that it isn't too thick or too thin; and utilize the movement of this tool, as described here:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let our head have a hair or where we put the medicine, like in movements of a spoon, and place the tool entirely with the medicine on the eye; and the patient lies still on their side so that saliva and moisture drain out of their mouth from the medicine inside, so that it doesn't go down to the throat and cause irritation; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it relieve and the medicine's actions are calmed. And if you see this, take cotton and envelop it with any tool, soak the cotton in medicine, and place the tool entirely on the cotton in sand, until the cotton dries out on the eye; and do this often, until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and rest for four or five days. And if you need to repeat the medicine's cauterization procedure, then repeat it, and after the cauterization, cleanse inside the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and clean off what is left of the medicine; and rinse with cold water, and rinse with gargling until it heals completely.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer with an incision rather than using the cautery; if it's treated by fumigation in this manner, gather lavender, thyme, oregano, rue, chamomile and parsley, and similar herbs. Combine all or some of these into a single pot, put it there, and let it boil. The pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot place one tool according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And use silver or iron, and have one of the shoulder tools placed in the mouth against the disease until the steam rises from inside to the womb through the cervix, until the womb is dead; after that repeat this many times, until the womb dries out. Ensure not to do this at the beginning of the coming of an abscess fever, for many things can happen; and don't perform this tool when there's a decline in the abscess fever. And if this instrument isn't present, take a rod and place an eggshell inside the head, so that the mouth against the disease doesn't get too hot; because the eggshell does not let the steam weigh down the mouth, and it's a good treatment for health together.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it clears the throat bone or spine of fish, without any result; if you must do this, take what you can see and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument until you see movement. For anything that does not appear and is retracted in the throat, you should make the patient vomit so that the disease comes out as though it had been cooked in the stomach; by chance if it escapes through vomiting; or if the disease swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie to the sponge a string, then swallow her; when she comes up to the mouth, she will clear up, and then you pull with force; and if it doesn't come out through this method we've mentioned, take one tool of ash according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And make the tools sharp near the head so that they can enter the throat more easily and have the head raised up high; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, letting nothing pass or pushing any bone inward; ensure that the patient pushes the tool when it moves or if something is loose; if you push it down, or pull with strength equally across the entire tool until it reaches full force.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the windpipe
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No treatment has been applied to the windpipe as I have mentioned in division, through medicine cure; and if this does not help, then examine inside the patient's throat towards the sun, pressing their tongue with the tool I instructed you about. And when you see the windpipe, extract it little by little using a piece of thread or fine tongs suitable for this task. And if this doesn't work, take some hair and insert it into the affected part of the throat, then pull out half an iron coin from there and do this repeatedly. And if the patient sweats with cold water all day long, then fill one cup of cold water and rinse their mouth with it, then spit it out without swallowing, and move your hand frequently; and as soon as the windpipe feels the cold water, they will vomit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it doesn't urinate as we have said, instruct the patient to subfumigate with asafetida, using the instrument described in the fumigation of the eyelid; do this many times because she will not be relieved by bleeding. And the way of this fumigation is that you take one pot containing burning charcoal, and place it covered with a perforated lid in the middle, and at the bottom of this pot is where the instrument's head is placed; then release your fumigation, and have the patient put the tip of the stick into their mouth, and seal the mouth so that no fumes escape but flow until reaching the nostrils; and now the blood will come out. If it doesn't urinate, you must again commence the fumigation many times. And let the patient endure thirst, consume salty foods and such, and do not drink water; then it is necessary for her to expel this through this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the tool with which we treat the bleeding is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved scissors for entering into the throat; and has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and it has been sharpened like a lime, so whatever she takes in, she cannot leave; and here see this shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	No descriptions of abscesses exist as recalled by the memory from one to another in this book, they differ in perforation and incision; it's done in two ways wherein one is akin to its appearance itself, and due to moisture. And the second way depends on the joints or their locations within the body. because abscesses at the head are different from those at the base, and abscesses at the meaty part of limbs are different from those that come in articulations, each has its own judgment in operation.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if with abscesses one must not pierce until the boil is dead according to its maturation; and if there are such that it's necessary to pierce when they have grown and are not dead according to their maturation, like abscesses within joints. For when abscesses come within joints and are left until rotted inside, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint become corrupted, this is the cause of contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is within the main member, and you delay the perforation until it's dead, it will harm the principal member; or if it is within the base, if you pierce it then so that it becomes dead; this should not be done to pierce a growing abscess without full digestion completed, except for that which is within the base, which does not rot fully and remains deep inside, causing a fistula; and cannot heal properly in great extent.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it must be known when the time for perforating the boil that is dead according to maturation, and this is when the pain subsides, and departure of fever, and reduction in pain and heat, and movement and hardening of the head of the boil, and other signs; And you should let the perforation occur a little above the boil location or at the point where it opens, and wherever it appears. And make the perforation long throughout the body, and if the boil is on hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and all areas that do not have wrinkles.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	Among those who bend, according to that limb. And when abscesses are in the meaty part of your body, if they are punctured, you should let the puncture remain until digestion is fully accomplished, as we said before. For if you pierce it beforehand, it may stretch along with his body by the venom from him, and be full of all sorts of filth; and by chance harden the skin and the underparts of him. And for any abscesses that are punctured according to the width of the body, according to what the limb needs. It should be that you introduce small abscesses, small cuts; and in large abscesses, large cuts, and many wounds according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses or where you must pinch with a knife, and cover them; when it has turned as much as half a cloth piece, and is flattened, then should be done similarly as one does for breasts: and for those that are split into three angles, and for those that are cut like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses from angles; and for those where you make a round cutting, and other cuts and similar slicing.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those who don't have a head, such as abscesses on the surface, it should be that you completely pierce them; and when the abscess is large, and has a thick wall, if you puncture it you should not remove all the pus at once in that moment, but remove only part of it. Then let the abscess stand until another day, then leave nothing on the wound; do this repeatedly for large to small sizes, until all the pus comes out; similarly if the patient is weak in strength, or pregnant women, or young children, or old and decrepit people. For the spirit trembles every time with the release of pus that it might accidentally kill the patient, and you would not realize it. So then avoid this chapter by great caution, when you have punctured your abscesses, if the wound comes out, and look to see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it's a full cut, should apply linens or old cotton on it; and for large abscesses, with many cuts, then it's proper that in each one you make a tent so they go side by side; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin and you've sewn it together, then fill it with old cotton or flax rags that are not moistened, and secure them until the third day; then heal, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if bleeding occurs in your vein, then apply cold and soothing for a while. And if the bleeding persists, then take management and treatment, and use the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it's in an area affected by fever, or if the blood is very nervous, it's proper to put wet tents and cloths on it with wine and oil; and if it's hard, and the body part is fatty, then it's proper to apply wet cloths with water and oil, or wine and cold oil, until the third day as we said. And then remove the tent and drain and treat it properly until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know this universally in treatments of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed before treatments of abscesses, and here comes the chapter.
des soros	of the womb
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Where small abscesses come from, and their methods which are like meshes, such as the one you would find under a ewe's belly, there are many similarities. There are some that are fatty and full of moisture like pustules; and there are others that are hard and stony to the knife, and there is no doubt if they contain an artery or not. And in cutting during surgery, it is as follows: you try all one instrument called "entromissoire", which has this form afterwards, containing something inside. If it contains moisture, then it cuts through long. And when the moisture is drained, then scorch without leaving anything behind that contained the moisture; because it returns immediately once nothing is left in it; then dip cotton into Egyptian ointment if available; if not, into water and wine, and apply to the wound, allowing it till another day; and this will take care of what stays through the night. And after that, repeat the cotton treatment as before on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not stay overnight; then treat the wound with ointment suitable for healing, until it heals.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the size above the abscess stone and the wetness, it is lighter because there is little blood. And if none of these abscesses or head have any moisture, and among two abscesses that I copied from an old woman's head; and found the abscess as a soft stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and even if you had pierced neither of them, one would do just as well to make incisions like on a stone. For other abscesses coming or at heads of children and roots of ears, the opening should be for all days to the most depending upon it, so that the body can exit; and treat them according to how they need to be treated.
des scrophules	Of the scrophulae
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times abscesses occur in the throat and around the glands, and sometimes in the neck or on the collarbone, and they are soft and often stick together. Each scrophula is properly within its own compartment, just like a nodule and an abscess at the base of the neck, as we have said; and there are many appearances of these scrophulae. There are some that contain moisture, and others that refuse to comply with treatment. In such cases where you see good arrangement for surgery and resembles the color of the collarbone, it neither swells nor moves under the throat or artery or conduit, and is not deep; then it's necessary to cut above it, scrape each part, and pinch both lips around the glands if needed, as we have said in abscesses at the base. And treat slowly, be sure not to cut the nerve or vein, don't go too far inward that you cut into pus or trenching, make sure your hands do not slip away, and do not look too far ahead, so that you do not cut more than necessary.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it doesn't allow you to open further, apply vitriol broil or any powders that stop blood loss onto the wound; and leave it there until abscesses are alleviated and the wound begins to heal. And when the bleeding stops, resume your work, as long as you complete it; then based on your judgment if there are no small pustules remaining, remove them. And if in the root of a pustule there's a large vein, you should not cut that pustule at its root but tie it with a double strong thread and let it drop out by itself without harm. Then treat the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then apply treatment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you have removed the entire pustule, it is necessary to assemble the two edges of the wound and sew them now. There should be no excess left due to the size of the pustule. You must know how to cut through its root, drain it properly, and then stitch as we've explained previously. Those pustules that have excess substance, puncture them where they open; and do so like the one mentioned earlier, ensuring you're cautious, then administer remedies with ointment and similar things, until what was rotten begins to decay; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply a dressing with ointment and bandage until it's no longer infected.
de squinance	regarding squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones spoke and wrote about the operation of the throat cutting; but I never saw anyone do it in our land, and this is recorded from their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squinting vision, it is necessary that the incision in the throat referred to as "epiglottis" be made; and one should not seek aid for this, because all the veins and the heart are sensitive to individuals who have abscesses either inside their mouth or in the throat or between two almond-shaped structures.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is within the channel of the heart, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we make three or four small cuts through, between the two circles, so that the size of the cut does not touch the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And these shoulders are suitable for the section of the epiglottis that has no meat, and the vessel is long in the neck.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the surgeon is fearful, it's necessary that he extends the throat skin to all the nape of neck, then cut through the jugular until he reaches the windpipe; and avoid blood vessels, should you see anything, and then scrape out the tonsil, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it's demonstrated by the division of the windpipe stream which forces its way through the broken neck, and through the loss of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time has passed since one doubts strangulation, gather the two mouths of the wound as neatly as possible, and all along the skin but not through the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce flesh until it is clean.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim insists that one should not perform this until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged dead, and the defect has been made.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	So cut into the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe normally, and they breathe through the wound, and thus are protected from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And because the old man was instructed to leave the wound open until the disease's illness passes, and it has passed in three or four days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they instructed to sew up the wound and treat it until it was healed;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a maiden took one dagger, and stabbed it into her throat, and cut some of the windpipe.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I was called to treat her, and found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound, and found that blood was issuing from it, and indeed she did not have a cut vein or exit route but rather her veins were exiting through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurriedly, and thus treated the wound, and cured it as soon as she was healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and didn't leave the young lady until her voice had recovered, and she returned after to her condition.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I swear by heaven that in the surgery of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	In the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	Thick abscesses are called "throat hernia", and they are large abscesses of a black color, and are very common in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and according to two ways: natural and accidents; or naturally there is no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidents are according to two ways, from which one seems like pus coming from us, and the other way seems like an abscess that comes from our blood.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And there must be fear, and it does not suit to make fire outside that in this which is small, and the proof and search for all the introduction:
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as thin as half an inch thick, and cannot fit into any vein, then cut it, as one would cut a notch, and guide it with all its shaping, if there is even the slightest opening;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and thoroughly clean it out, then treat it as needed, until it is completely healed.
des nous	from the wound
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways are there for us, of which I will say all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And it is fitting that I mention all the differences that exist between us and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is characterized by heat and fever persisting until the ebullitions have passed and putrefaction has occurred; thus, the fever and heat are brought to rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With respect to dislocation there is no heat, fever or pain, and it contains 1.5, which is its own sack and lies within the body's structure, starting off like a boil, and becomes enlarged;
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And they depend on two appearances, whether it's oily or moist, and none of their colors are like what I've mentioned in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the treatment of a new wound, you should first test and inquire about all the instruments known as 'entromissors', according to whether their form matches or comes before or after in the chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of inquiring about abscess discharges from wounds is that you should drain more moisture than what you find in the abscess, and make your cuts little by little until you know that the instruments have reached the pus, then it must be according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then remove the entromissor, and take care not for any rupture.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture is involved, whatever its nature, if you make an incision as I have described for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after the first incision no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then cut accordingly for other abscesses, and take hold of it with forceps, and gently scrape off from each side, and protect the area where you will remove it, ensuring a clean extraction using the tool;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot extract it cleanly, then extract it piece by piece so that nothing is left behind.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything is left behind, it will recur through repeated occurrences;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it stays a little bit, and you aren't troubled by it, apply some corrosive watery powders to the wound, and restrain the wound, and place soothing things on abscesses that are warm, and treat other treatments until he is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if it's large for us, tie the two sides of the wound together, and treat the one who is sucking on flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is too small or otherwise causes concern, do it quickly and fill the wound with powdered vitriol, and let it sit for two to three days, until the wound begins to heal, and rest the hot bleeding; then continue with whatever has been left over from new treatments.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here are the forms of the incision tools, and there are three ways: large, medium, and small; and if you have four square pieces called 'albaret', and one called 'breb', and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are also like the needles from which one removes the thorns, and made of citrine quartz or iron or silver, and those that are yellow in color perform better than black lead for encircling the deformities of fistulas.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And they can be in three ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the width of the defects.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of the clamps are like those you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are two curves in the clamps as well, just like these.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And if the clamps have two curves and come in two forms as well; and if they have two curves each, or just one curve each, also coming in two forms; and all these are necessary for their use.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of this to whom one makes his sharp, and among these is there who cuts not power but from one side, where one sears the flesh, because in it one does not cut the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And of these introducers their instruments are placed in gloves, so that the patient does not perceive them during the opening of abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And there are three ways: large, small, and medium, just as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And one uses none with much force except in the thigh muscles, such as legs and arms, and nipples, and at joints, and in similar cases;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And never did one make another tool small, resembling whips of hawthorn wood, according to this form, upon which one stops blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed only once at the healthy site of arteries and veins, and never in accordance with this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Never do the nipples of some men swell as they begin to become corrupted, until they seem like nipples of women.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	And remain ugly and swollen, and whoever tries to cure them should do so according to this method described in line b., up until point .g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicated ointment. Then join together the two edges of the wound for suturing purposes until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	And if the belly sags down, and is flattened due to its size like it happens in women, if you make cuts above it, by two similar slits;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	So that one holds the other at the end of each, such that the longer line contains the shorter according to this form, from this line B up to the line G;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape off the skin that is between the two edges, and remove the fat, and apply what we have instructed about suturing and powders, and what is necessary for treatment until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it isn't clean, or the incision hasn't been fully made, because the patient doesn't want to rest, or due to the bleeding, you should fill the wound with wet cotton in a corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And leave it until it begins to chew and move the meat and fat, then treat it until it is clean.
des apostemes des asselles	removal of abscesses from the armpit
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Wounds that come from around the glands are methods of scrophula hard swellings or when there are nodes, and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Thus, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from the line b until the line .g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and apply ointment as long as the wound is healing.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are like scrophula swellings, cut them as we have said in cuts on scrophula swellings, and if the wound is filled with pus, then apply a cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	from the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sealed, many times abscesses result. And similarly, this happens with the pierced vein and abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows how to do it like this for an artery, the abscesses are long and deep;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it with your fingers, if you feel resistance; and when it's about the vein, it will show up as bulging outward;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it is madness to remove this abscess, and similarly when it's in the armpits, and under the arms, and on the neck, or in other parts of one's body, and it's very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	So then it's necessary to avoid the iron treatment. Likewise, one should avoid in the case of the head, and also in the case that there is swelling from arteries, they do this above the skin for a long time;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then proceed with cutting through the flesh until you can beautifully remove the artery from the tissues, as long as it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then insert a needle under it and pierce until you reach the other side of the body, then hold the artery with a double thread on two needles, as I instructed you in extracting the two arteries that are located between the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then do not allow the hand that is between the two points of the introducer to move until all the pus has been expelled and remove the abscess;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then perform the treatment that drains the wound, as long as there is discharge from the point.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat with the accompanying ointment until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	And if the abscess is of the size of a vein, it is necessary that you mark with your hand all the part of the abscess up to the skin.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	Then pierce the needle through the place where you hold with your hand and let it go, and have one doubled thread, so that you can pull it from the other side of it;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	Then tie off the abscess, as I have instructed you, or use two threads from each of the two shoulders to bind it;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	And if you doubt that the threads will hold, then pierce another needle with both of them through all the abscess from the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads tight in four turns;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut away the excess of the abscess as it comes out, then trim the remaining part neatly and leave what is tied.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put on one wet cloth dipped in wine and oil, then give it treatments and applications until the wounds are healed.
des apostemes des ners	removing of abscesses from nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also like abscesses that come into the artery and the vein, abscesses occur in nerves when they are punctured or due to too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often at shoulders and elbows, and in all places where there are joints, it's one kind of abscesses, and its color looks like the color of flesh, and can be in various postures without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when one restrains it by form, the patient feels pain, and is not fully contained by the body, but only within the hollow.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And moves well in all directions, neither forward nor backward, neither above nor below. If it's in joints, iron doesn't suitably cover it: by chance it would cause constriction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And the one that is on the head or forehead causes the skin to blister.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscesses are small, use a pair of forceps and grip them at their base;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it's large, suspend it at the navel, and scarify, then set the bones and stitch the wound together, and treat until it heals properly.
des grosses boces pendans	And large swellings hang down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	It happens in the belly and nowhere else often, and it's an illness called "fungus" by its appearance, and it is delicate at its root, and has large heads; and there are both small and much larger ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw two homes where there were four bellies that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference at all, they were white, had a small root, and were cracked, and they corroded even with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I collected and found it to weigh in the first 1.8 ounces, and in the second 5 ounces, and in this operation when you observe that the patient is moist, and the color of the flesh is white and moist with a subtle root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If it's cut too wide in the operation, and let the fire cautery be present before you. For the surgeon often sees excessive bleeding many times, and if it doesn't stop with you, then quickly take the cautery to help;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	And if you see the patient is frightened and fearful from the incision due to the heat of the iron, then take a good piece of hemp thread and tie it to the flesh as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	And then restrain, and do not cease to pull the thread of plonc until it reaches the joint, and each piece without causing strain; and if the roots are large, so that fear is felt during the process for the belly, but you can properly pull half.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	And then cauterize so that it does not re-erupt; then treat the wound, and ensure you do not allow a pus-filled blister to form with poor sensation and milk-like discharge.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an abscess that has opened, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	And if you are blind.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	When the appearance of the boil comes through a wound cautery or a cut from sepsis, and it appears on the belly and in some parts of the intestines, as happens in other cuts, where blood cuts out of veins or arteries according to what is before, or due to windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it's due to the rupture from sepsis and through the opening of the boil, its color is similar to that of flesh, and it's a light matter with little pain, and opens from various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it's due to the opening from the intestines, then it's more diverse, and when you press it with your fingers it comes back and then returns again, and by chance it gets stuck, and swells quite at the entry of the bath and through strenuous work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it's due to moisture, it's a simple matter, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraining it; and if it's due to blood, it opens through these signs - the abscesses are large and hard, and are situated according to their quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it's due to windiness, the breath is at the nostrils, and the veins so that you see whether their appearance is for blood from an artery, or a vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	It's necessary to leave the treatment alone. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter about abscesses, for arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance seems to be on the intestines or in the belly, you should instruct the patient to prick their side and have it extended entirely straight, then seal it completely around the belly.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then command it to heal quickly between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go into the area that you have marked with all the pus.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then extend half of the pus to above all the large curve;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then bind him internally with a strong thread, or tightly with a cord of robust silk, and ensure the binding is tight.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then operate on half of the abscess extending above the binding, and hold your finger in place, and observe the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught by the binding, remove the binding, and press the intestine towards the back of the belly;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the bowels, take them at the navel, and remove any excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery opposes you or the vein, if you insert them deeply inwards, then return to your work and take two needles, and set aside two pieces of thread, and place the two needles inside where you pierced when you made the incision;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then apply pressure with four fingers over the needles above the puncture; and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the wound to heal until it scabs, and remove any dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Once the wound has become subtle and scabbed over, then treat it as necessary, and remove the puncture like we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And remove the blood or moisture you find, then treat the wound as necessary, and suture the wound.
dou chancre	and gangrene
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed the signs of gangrene and how to treat it with medicines, as well as avoiding iron treatment. We say that if gangrene begins in a moist area or in the same place repeatedly, such as in breasts or cooking areas and other similar places, you should remove it entirely when it's just beginning; but for large and old gangrenes, it's not advisable to touch them, because I've never seen anyone recover from them, nor was anyone ever cured of gangrene before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for the incisions, if it's in an area where you can remove it, as we have said before, you should cleanse the patient of black pus once. Then let a surgeon assess if there is any swelling present, then proceed to cut open that area; this means making sure the incision site is clean and ready for treatment. Next, scrape off all traces of gangrene and hair from around it, and remove everything from the edges as well, ensuring nothing remains. Let the blood flow freely without obstruction, cleanse the wound thoroughly with your hand or anything else you may have on hand, and if bleeding in opposite directions occurs compared to an artery or vein incision, cauterize until the bleeding has stopped; then treat it further until it heals properly.
de ydropisie	From dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have discussed the signs of dropsy in division, and how water assembles, and the signs for each sign, and the treatment done with medicines, and that which is treated with iron: these are only examples; one should not use iron in these four conditions: to know, peritonitis and lymphedema, because it is a fatal thing; therefore when you treat this dropsy condition known as 'eclites' using medicines, and the treatment doesn't help, if the patient seems weak or has another disease besides dropsy, such as stomach pain and other related symptoms; then do not use iron, for there's doubt; and if you see the patient very pale, and they have only dropsy aside from any other illness, and their age is neither too young nor too old, you should proceed like this:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Lift the patient's leg with your hands, and have the ministers press the belly from above at the lowest part near the heel. Then take the thorn-syringe according to this shape: And make two cuts of about an inch each pointwise, but not so deep that it can reach the intestine when inserted, and cannot be seen;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look to see if the hernia is pressing towards the intestines: if it should be that you must cut in the vicinity of the belly button, .iij. inches straight down from the navel; and if the hernia is due to illness affecting the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the belly button, .iij. inches; and if it's caused by the gallbladder, then your cut should be on the right side, and it shouldn't be that the patient lies prone with the cut so that excess fluids do not flow to the weak part.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce all the skin with the tool and pull it out, lifting your hand from the sputum between the skin and the stomach as much as when searing a finger or part of that; then puncture the stomach until the pus comes to his eighth part, and this is where the water leaves, then pull gently, and hold the tool in which this is formed: And it looks like a thin silver cane, and it's made of iron or bronze and light, and about .i small parts on one side; and if from one side, .iij parts; and .ij from another side, and .i from another; and cut your hands as a feather would, this is the form of the incision that the writers cut in their feathers.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top is the stomach, so that when the tool comes to water, it now goes out from above the tool; empty it then half or a third of it, because if you drain more than should be in this hour, by chance the patient dies due to the release of his spirit of the weapon, or he vomits, or he approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but adjust it according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the virtues suggest about the illness and its pulse; then place the tool and hold the water, and now this is held due to the numbness that comes from the tip above the scab, as I spoke, you pierce in this manner; then repeat using the tool on another day, if you see the patient suffering under it, and draw out a small quantity of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do this every day, and refrain from overusing it as long as there's no relief but a small amount of water. And if you doubt the illness, and leave more water than necessary, if the burial or sand feels hot, and with much sweating or bathing under the sun, and if it gets bluish; then drink and take medicine for drying out until it's healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver after extracting the water, as I explained before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Regarding the constriction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	No child is born without any hairs on the penis, or if there are hairs they are small, or not in place. If it suits to pierce them all at once with two very thin points according to this shape: then put one of these thin copper points and bind and keep them for three or four days, and when it wants to urinate, remove the plug, allow urine, and then put him back; and sometimes it doesn't suit because the urine that comes out no longer leaves the plug closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	If the hairs are small, if there is medicine for a copper plug, as we have said before, if it will enlarge. Those who do not have their hairs in place are blind, because no child is born with hairs at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot have sex because the matter cannot come till the scrotum, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way of treating it is that the patient lies on their back, and holds their penis head and testicles in place as if they were holding a feather's length, so that the hairs lie flat in the middle, just like it should; and be careful not to let blood flow out many times, and if it does happen, stop it with someone who stops bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	The boils of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times sores appear on the penis, and there's a terrible appearance to them; some are bad and others aren't. It is necessary that you weigh them at an ounce and a half, then prepare and cleanse them all thoroughly, place Egyptian ointment-soaked cotton over them; then cure with diaphanicon balm until they have healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the sores are evil and causing pus and leakage, it is necessary to apply a cautery to them. Once you've treated them, and if the sores are located on the penis and have parts within the skin and parts outside, it is necessary to remove the inside part of the sores first; and when they heal, then treat the external area. For when you treat them together, there must be no assurance that the head of the penis will not be pierced, leading to darkness and corruption in the penis and anus; it's necessary to remove everything that is dark and corrupted, then cover with a plaster made of apple pomace and flour, then apply other treatments until they heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if there is bleeding or corruption, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries assist each other as a whole: that means during bleeding and in case of corruption. If the head of the penis becomes infected or removed, it's necessary to insert a thorn into the penis and let the patient urinate while holding it; and when the skin has become loose at the head of the penis for those who have not been circumcised, or due to wound or abscess, then you must burn with one instrument made from hair until all the ties are released, and liberate the head of the penis from all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it's hard to describe this procedure, then you should burn with hot iron at the root of the penis and scrotum for some time. Then cut cleanly between two fingers, and place a thin linen band dipped in cold water right there, so that it does not touch directly.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not an injury to continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own volition and for children, it must be necessary that we do the best job, and cause the least harm for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old did not instruct circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we only have this practice based on what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I wanted the largest part of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision between the first day after birth and one week later, and for all a newborn; if there was a knot because there are two sheets, and by chance one is placed above and the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the wound is covered, and there is double pain, and in the first days after birth the tip of the limb is not secure; and in the trimming of the nail by chance the knife misses the mark and cuts too much into the work, and they are born like this more often than necessary, and I want this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the trimming done with force on all the threads I found the value of experimentation, for the strengths cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, cut it in halves equally on the line. But let the threads be well inserted between the skin; and do it in such a way as the first cut was done that you make the child think, if they hear, that you are only tying the thread around the penis just there and then allow it to move in all possible ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then make it stand straight between your hands, and hold the strength in your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the tools; then push your hand on the penis and blow or speak softly, and pull it up until the head of the penis is inside. Then clean it well from the dirt that has accumulated, then tie its root with a double thread, then tie under the first two by half each other. And hold them at their two thumbs by the second layer to the pouch and the tip index finger, and divide between the two threads, then lift your breath quickly and pull the head of the penis.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood drip slowly and slowly, because it's the pus; and put powder above and above the powder one spoonful of glue from a raw egg beaten with rose water, mixed with rose oil that is good and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and treat it another treatment until it heals.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of force during creation is like this: the two shoulders should be placed and cut, and the shoulders should also be as large as the arms evenly.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in creation is when the kidneys within are displaced by incision; thus it's necessary that you extend to your fingernail, so that the ribs make an opening; and treat equally; if you cannot hold at your fingernail, then use tweezers, and then proceed.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they exceed three days, and the one near the penis is swollen, let him stay until the openings are alleviated, and lightly scarify; if you can move it as much as you can, and avoid the part of the penis, it will not harm him at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the internal parts of things with powder that we have spoken about in treating powders and if you press too hard on the kidney and it goes above, it will not cause harm. So treat it accordingly as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	regarding the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to the formation of stones, or blood being frozen, or the presence of worms, or birthed tumors, or similar things that we have discussed in the section;
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not relieved, and you see that the retention occurs due to stones in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be kneeling. And have their feet under the back, and extend their belly from the part above the back, and restrain the patient so they strain as much as possible; and thus forces the neck of the bladder to express the stone above, because this results in the urine being relieved.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if she doesn't come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary for you to administer extraction with all the instrument that is called "syringe", which is like this: it should be made of subtle silver wire, like a bird's feather; and should be about five inches long and half an inch wide, and should be subtle at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the method of its release from urine is such that you take a double thread, and tie one end to the head, with another piece of wool or cotton, and insert the head of the thread inside the catheter; and remove the excess length of the thread up until it reaches the tip of the catheter. Then, grease the catheter with oil or butter and beaten egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a chair while you pull out the bladder and penis with wet oil and olive oil.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then gently place the catheter in the penis, until it reaches the base of the penis. Next, fold the penis upwards towards the opening, then place the catheter before reaching the bladder and feel when urine starts flowing up to the empty thing. This is not done following this order because for what guides her is twisted; then pull out all the thread piece by piece and piece, allowing the urine to follow the thread, then remove it carefully and make sure that the urine flows properly.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And continue using the catheter until the bladder is emptied, and assure the patient is comfortable.
des maladies de la vessie	On diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood occur in the bladder, or pus is assembled there, and you see distilled waters and remedies, then prepare with all the instrument which is called "clepsis" (water clock), and its form is:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if it has three parts: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and let there be a passage through them so that the medicine can circulate properly inside without addition, if moisture can be treated, and to expel when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see the medicines being discharged in the bladder, place the tip of your finger in the moisture, and direct them towards the one who is pulling; if you pull out the moisture with the finger, then reinforce the puller immediately afterwards; if the moisture enters through it, will come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	And this is the form of the subtle bladder stone which one treats with cathartics for the bladder: thus it is.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or of iron, and the head is placed higher; and from this point to about half an inch above the pubis bone; then take a sheep's bladder and put in it some moisture with which you are supposed to treat the bladder, then tie it between the two pubis bones using a thick double thread. Heat one piece of that moisture on fire; then place the stone head in the urethra, then press your hand against the bladder with all of that moisture until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make one circle, then pierce it roundly through. Then insert a strong thread into these holes, then join the circle as you would assemble a platter, and put inside what appears with moisture and water, and tie in the instrument; do this like you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have discussed in the division methods for stone expulsion and medication; and we have explained the differences between mature stones that cause pain, and all their signs, as well as which stones should be surgically removed; and regarding the bladder and penis; and I will explain this clearly and briefly to you.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that the urinary infection has spread throughout its subtlety; and it causes pain repeatedly, and there's a sensation of fullness in their urethra, and they urinate many times, then develop an urge again; and at these repeated urges lies the kidney; and until about four years old, children experience lighter healing due to their condition; it becomes more painful for those who are older, being somewhere between childhood and age; and the treatment is generally easier for those with larger stones than for those with smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient through diuresis in order to drain all the toxins from the intestines. For it often blocks trying to remove the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take hold of the patient by their elbows, and stand them up and move them backward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and emerges no higher than their chest; then have them sit between your hands, with their arms resting on their thighs, so that the bladder is fully sloping downward; then guide it and touch it from there;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in space, now hurry to cut on the stone. And if it doesn't urinate at all with touching, moisten your index finger of your left hand; if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and fully grown; then stand it on its base, guide the stone, touch it from there; when you feel it with your finger, draw it to the neck of the bladder; then press towards your finger, and push through the skin where you see the cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to extend his right hand up at top, and with his left hand hold the skin that is near the scrotum in the area where the cut will be made; then he pushes out the prostate gland, which is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make the space between what is inside the coions and the foundation, not in the middle but at the edge of the left snow (ice), and be straight on the stone, and your hands should be close to or against the foundation, and its size should go through so that it's wide outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	By chance if the press is where it should be that's against or on the foundation, let it break naturally without effort; and know that there are parts of stone with angles and edges: if they're rough to come out; and if there's a part beneath it resembles a pebble, round shaped, from which the extraction is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	In such places where it has angles and edges, make the size larger; and if it doesn't break, then you should grip with the tongs that are like a file at their tip to pull on the stone so that it doesn't escape; or you use a tool that is slightly curved at its tip; and if you can't devise this way, then make them one inch wide and long, and if they're not hollowed out from both sides, then you force them with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there are more than one stone, start by removing the largest at the neck of the bladder, then go upwards, cut forcefully through it, and take the smaller ones after if there are any others. And if it is very large, you might have to make a larger incision. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine comes out right away from the place where his limbs cannot join; but still, strive with your forceps, or with your pincers, until you remove it piece by piece;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have completed your work, fill the wound with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood, and bind it up tightly, and apply one oil-soaked piece of linen or in a mixture of oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the inflamed abscess; then restitch the patient's neck, and do not remove the suture until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove the stitches, rinse thoroughly with oil and water, then treat it with diacynicon ointment and basil ointment until it heals properly.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if the abscesses and corrosion come to the wound, and blood congeals in the bladder, and is held back by this causing urine retention, which occurs in such a manner that without jumping along with the urine: then you must treat the wound, remove that blood, for if it stays there, it corrodes the bladder and deteriorates it;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then cleanse the wound with water and oil and wine, and assist him in all ways that you see fit, until he is healed; and it must be that every time you cure his wounds, you tie his two legs together, and apply the remedies to his body.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small, and it's located where the penis leads out, and is stuck inside, causing urine to not be able to pass; when you treat him as I've instructed, cut his penis many times, and forgive the cuts resulting from this treatment. I have already found this effective.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron fork according to this form and have three pegs fixed into it:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take one thread and tie the ligature around the shaft of the penis so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the fork into the shaft gently, until it reaches the stone; and twist the fork with your hand in the stone gradually, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if urine starts to come out quickly, then press your hand on what is left of the stone inside the penis. If it breaks quickly, and the urine flows along with it, treat the patient;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie one thread around the stone and another above it, then place the penis in contact with the stone between the two threads, then pull forceably, and remove the thread, and cleanse the frozen blood from the wound; and treat him until he is sound.
de la piere des femmes	From the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens that stone is found within women, and if it occurs once, then it is treated carefully, and is forbidden for three reasons: one is perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that no one can find out a woman who is not aware of her condition even when she is pure.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find out a woman well versed in this art of medicine; and the fourth way is that the stone in women is more protruding than the stone in men, for which reason it requires deeper surgery, and great fear arises.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if necessity requires this, you should seek out a midwife who is well informed, and find her path in the way; and if you do not find one, rather than two subtle pure women; and present one who knows about part of the art of medicine among women's lives, or a woman who knows some part of that craft, and command her to do what you instruct on the examination of stones.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And make sure to examine the woman very carefully: she must push with her shoulder or support point and aim at the stone; if she finds it, force it against her shoulder and guide it in that direction, and advise her to press on her shoulder when touching the illness, and squeeze her left hand onto the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, she should move the stone gradually from the start of the bladder to just below it as far as possible until she reaches the thigh root; then press on the stone at the thigh root against the middle of her crotch, where its edges are felt and you sense the stone in that area. And do not move her shoulder above or under the stone, and make a small incision there first.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then make the incision in her waist; if you feel the stone, enlarge the wound until the stone can be expelled with force, and know that there are many types of stones: small ones, large ones, hard or soft ones, round or irregularly shaped ones, and those that have various shapes. And understand their characteristics to know their exit points.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if it does not heal quickly, place sulfur powder on it and keep it there for an hour until the sulfur is absorbed; then return to your work, as long as the stone remains intact, and have at hand the instruments I have instructed you about in the extraction of stones to help you with your task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it does not heal quickly, and if the artery is cut, apply powder to the site and compress it with bandages for several days without repeating this process, and leave the stone alone without removing it, in case by chance it kills the patient; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the limbs are resting, return to your work as long as the stone remains intact.
de hernie carnouse	Of fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Watery hernia is nothing else but a gathering of moisture or white pus, which resides in the skin of the kidneys, what contains the egg; and it's called 'pus', and it's not properly on the membrane of the egg if one thinks there could be another egg; and that's the skin under the kidney where we've said white pus resides; and this doesn't have a hole.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the production of this watery hernia is due to weakness that affects the kidneys, and this substance spreads out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And it never comes about due to impact on the kidneys, and this moisture has many colors: or it is declining in color to jaundice, or it is without redness, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs to recognize this assembly; for if it is or as white as we said, then the pus pockets will be present, that is, quite long like an egg's shape, and do not open to the heart, because it is moist throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there's moisture in the proper skin, then the pus pockets will contain part of an egg, and because of this, we think it is another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the moisture is between the skin of the heart and the white as we said, you can feel it well; therefore, when you know the color of the moisture, you test through all the internal square part, from which its form is as shown.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	As for those who come after the introduction, judge by what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure them with iron, it is necessary that the patient be cleansed according to our ability and their body's restoration; then support them behind, on a thing somewhat elevated, and put underneath him pieces of cloth;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	Then sit on their left side, and command the minister to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula and cut the skin around it from long to below the knuckle, and make the incision straight up until reaching the white tissue, and gently burn through it according to one's ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then puncture the eye completely full of water to one and a half inches wide, extract all the water, and then place your thimbles, making sure that the eye is up-stream; and don't touch the root of the ears, but only the eye. Carefully remove the costum (a type of fabric) from his body in whole or pieces as you see fit, for if it's removed poorly, water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the egg jumps onto your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the eye; then join the two halves of the ear's root with stitches, then treat it like other wounds until it heals completely.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find that the egg has been affected by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the suspensory vessels, in anticipation of bleeding; then remove the scrotum down to the suspension point, and extract the egg, then treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the wound is gathered in two joined parts, know that these are two twigs; if you process the other part just like you did with the first equally, then let out the blood, and place moistened wool in the wound dipped in rose oil;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another layer of damp wool in wine and oil, and place them on the two sides, and put cloths over them, and secure them with strips above to all the binding that follows this shape:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two cloths, and fold them with stitched wool according to this pattern, sewn together along the waistband of the trousers, and one end of each shoulder reaches up to the back, and the other at the part near the elbow; and place both shoulders on the two corners, and let the rest of the tightening be around the loop of the braces.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And never is this rod of the cautery cured in the size of iron, and it's that you take one small surgical cautery tool, and prepare the skin of the animals, and heat them as we have said, so that the white liquid within which contains water is revealed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if you take the cautery according to this shape, and puncture this white liquid as veins, and burn it with this fine cautery heated:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And the operation in all the ways that you can, as long as you have reached it entirely; and remember not to let the fire touch the egg; know that this work is more safe; and take care to prevent blood loss, and be aware of the size of your operations;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if nothing opposes you, or if an abscess bursts or blood loss occurs or something else does, treat what opposes you according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the disease is fearful and cannot wait for this operation due to its horror, then perform a puncture, as I have told you, and know that when you are well certain by the meanings that we have said that watery pus is there,
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Let the patient sit on a raised seat; then puncture the abscess at the part under it to cover the entire pus-filled area, and make the incision along the length of the body; and let the incisions be wide enough so that all the liquid comes out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton on it, secure it and allow the removal of all liquid from here. Once done with this, treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the white linen does not allow water to seep out of the wound's mouth, it is necessary for you to pour in a feather or the instrument used to treat the liquid from dropsy patients; this tool was described above. And make the incision approximately an inch deep into the wound, and know that the water will return after about 7 months, which is when it is assembled again, as before, and in such manner the patient will live their days with the disease.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the pus of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in this branch there are multiple positions for fear, so I think it's better to choose the one where you leave it;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and appearances of the pus.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	So then I say that many abscesses come from or around the scrotum, and even the testicles; and this happens through chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is to know by excess of sourness and fever, which spreads among cattle or through striking;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and its color of the abscess according to the color of the blood; and there is no pain, it's an abscess with pus;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And by chance there's an abscess with pus and pebbles, and it has a reddish color, and it doesn't come from a vein or from swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it's due to blockage of an artery, one can tell by the position of pus at the incision site, when you press on it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And it is not proper for you to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	That which is made of blood-filled veins can be known by its position when the vein is expressed through touching with fingers,
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	And it can very well measure this likeness, and on other structures;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And it is that you take hold of the neck of the chicken, then let the egg be placed upright, and support its belly white side up, and free all suspensory ligaments from the egg in every direction.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already solid with these new chickens, then it follows that you should lift the egg, and hold onto its neck.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it's facing the white side up, or within the vessels, then you should free all that part, and hold onto its neck roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the egg is at the rear of the womb, then you should hold onto it completely and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your tasks are completed, if you dress the wound with wet wool in oil and wine, then continue other treatments until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess in the breasts
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess enveloped with an wrapping resembling one, with the softening of the breasts,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and when it goes, it causes the glands to hurt significantly;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	And the treatment for this illness is also quite meticulous like the one before it,
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	yet we will tell you about its work, according to what the old ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you have the patient sit on an elevated chair, then put the head on the ring of support for the back of the neck with your hands,
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	extend all the organs that are close to the penis, and have the assistants hold them in place, and spread them out.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	Then cut to a broad deep incision through the vessels, until they are exposed.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then sear from each side as we have said in their extraction which are in temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then I place one needle with two threads and tie it at the first location where the thread has come out, then tie the other end to the opposite end immediately.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then cut straight through the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as with others or bind it up, so that no hair escapes until one of the ears grows.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	because this causes no harm, and if all hairs are straight, then one must cut the ears on all the hairs.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the hair does not lose its growth due to cutting of the hairs, and dries and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the syphilitic sore.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The occurrences of this case happen through the cut, when it leads to bleeding, or during stretching on the stomach in the area of the ribs, because the intestines descend from that opening into one of the kidneys;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	And this opening is where it leads to bleeding, or during the stretching of him, and come these two ways from the cause: through impact, or by jumping, or by bellowing, or by lifting the weight with difficulty, and in similar manners;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And when it is due to stretching at the navel, if it happens gradually and in length over time, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the abscesses are equal up until around the front part, because the navel presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it's from abdominal section, that a sudden pain begins at the start, and various abscesses are visible, around the skin area, and this is due to the discharge of the intestine and body outside of the abdominal cavity.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the loops descend with the intestine, and are held back, causing great pain for the patient, even when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments involving fear, it is advisable to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of this treatment involves commanding or instructing the patient to insert their intestine into their hand within the wound, if it can be inserted.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then secure him by his neck,
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then stretch the knee upwards,
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then insert fingers through the waistband,
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then strip the scrotum of all its skin,
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then point your thumb at the one who marks out the head, in the one between the white yolk that is under the egg skin, and between the second yolk.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and remove the one behind the egg, and between the second yolk; and then move to your right hand inside the pelvic cavity, and position the white yolk at your left hand top, and lift the egg towards all the yolks towards the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and release the one behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and check with your thumbs if there is any intestines enveloped or white yolk hard, and if you find nothing, remove it inside the belly.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take a needle or it be made with ten threads and make the thread in the back part of the syph, which is after the skin of the thighs; after that cut, then pinch off the dents that appear from the threads until there are four threads left;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then join them one on top of the other in a manner of a cross and tie the syph, which we have said is under the skin of the thighs with a strong thread of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the dents from the threads and tie them firmly with two parts, so that none of the needles that pierce them can enter you, to prevent the formation of an abscess.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And make the stitch straight according to the first long stitch of two inches in length. After these two stitches, leave a suture space which is on the kidney's place where it grows large as one inch;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	And after all the rest according to the roundness it has taken; then cut in the area beneath the skin of the kidney, as long as the penis does not bend and the testicles are normal, just as we have explained earlier.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then apply wet wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and use the stitch as we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And once the white suture space that we mentioned has been cauteryed, after incision, due to fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this happens often, and let the bandage until it bleeds for him; and if he does not fall out, then use hot water, and place on it what we have said, until it bleeds.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then treat the wound with other remedies, until it heals perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	regarding fatty hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I never see anyone who dares to undergo the treatment by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And it was said by the old ones that it is made as if you were assembling a bundle of twigs, in such manner that you tie the vessels, after trimming them lightly on the outside.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cut me, and treat the abscess of the one who is working, as long as the vessels are intact; and treat it in the manner we have said, while keeping it clean.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	None of the time comes rupture within the wounds, as we have said, and open their mouths; and do not let any intestines escape into them, and if they do escape, it's a little thing, and repair all times;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And still, if he stays too long at this point, the wound or gangrene is to be believed, as long as the intestines are escaping;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens through the stretching of the syphilitic sore, as we have said, for it has been stretched, then softened and swollen in his limbs and opened.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And the treatment is done through a cautery, as we have previously mentioned; and any time it is treated in this manner with iron:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	And when the patient lies on his back between your hands, then lift his body from the swollen area as wide as two inches according to its size;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	Then remove the syphilis that is under the skin as you proceed, then take hold of it and place it in the protruding area of the syphilis.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And the person presses on the front of the belly, then cuts the two apparent veins under the jaw in the head of the rib, and cuts both of them;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then removes the head of the rib, and does not cut under the jaw or extend the egg to any other thing, just as I have instructed you in the treatment for removing wind from the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then treat it using wound healing methods. And when you cut the stitches, if they heal and the wound is clean, until it heals fully.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The stomach is constrained, and does not show any sign in the operation, and the cauterization burns nearby in this area, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin around the genitals
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the genitals becomes soft in some men, because the parts inside soften and it can be seen; when one wants to treat them, it's necessary to make the patient lie on their back with the softened skin on top of natural skin; then join the two halves together at a seam, and if you wish, sew off the excess softened skin at three seams or four securely; then cut between the seams, and treat the wound like any other, until it heals, and stitch the sutured skin.
dou chastrement	about sexual abstinence
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	You should know that chastity is prohibited in our law, and for this reason it would please me not to discuss it in this book; and they are only necessary for two purposes: one is that a person knows how to respond when asked about it, and how to treat them; and the other, because we often need chastity of some animals to assist us, such as from goats and sheep and cattle and others. I say then that chastity is done in two ways: either by attraction or by opening. In the way we do by attraction, place the beast in hot water until their genitals soften and are submerged; then take them with your hands until they recover and you no longer feel them. As for tail whipping: it's necessary to mark the animal, press the genital skin on its left side with your left hand, then tie the scrotum, cut each testicle separately when they have been well scorched; and leave none of the thin fluid that is behind the testicles; this method of chastity is cruel compared to that done by attraction, because during attraction there may be a leftover from the genitals, so the beast craves lust; then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphrodites can be in two ways: one way is that between the two openings at their genitals, as per nature's figure of a woman, having hair and sometimes excreting urine. The other way is for females, having on their belly like a penis and two openings. And the treatment for males and hermaphrodites is that you treat all the joints together, and treat them like other wounds; in the second way, for those who urinate through the skin of their genitals, no treatment is needed.
de la tentigene	Of the warts
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tentigine is a joint formed on the natural body part, to such an extent that it is too ugly to see. Some women also have one as large as their hand, and this is its treatment. It is necessary for you to color the excess of the tentigine with your finger or nail, then gently remove it; do not cut it too deeply so that bleeding does not occur, then treat it again until it heals. And on another joint that comes out at the mouth of a married woman, and she uses it, sometimes by chance, and resembles a cow in appearance, which is why they called this old illness "cow disease". It should be treated in the same way as we have said about tentigine, treating it until it heals.
de erratique	Of cautery by fire command to the ill one that he leaves the hairs until they are long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratic is what comes from when the nature of the woman is not known or has been lost, or if it's due to small losses; and is natural by birth, or accidental by illness that came about; or it could be due to an injury received, or a subtle or thick foreign body, and this occurs in front during marriage, or in the chest, or underfoot, wherever it may happen; and one must consider when conceiving, during pregnancy, and occasionally when having flowers; and knowledge of this comes through observing a woman's gait. If the injuries are close and visible, feel them with your hands or on her backside. If it's due to a subtle foreign body, and if they're close around the two kidneys, you would handle as follows: place your two fingertips together, and have the woman lie down on her back, spreading out her legs; then form the two kidneys so that the subtle foreign bodies are completely burned and covered by them; then take ash, and the fatty parts of meat, and place it above her body, making sure she does not get a weld. And if the foreign body is hard and thick, you should cover with something resembling a laurel leaf. If the injuries came from an injury received in childhood, lift up to the navel and cover; and have restorative remedies for stopping blood such as garlic, dragon's blood, incense, all combined with plenty of eggs; then bring into use a large piece of poppy which prevents wound healing; and do this for a long time, and also have her covered in a linen tent; then continue other treatments until she is healed. And when there are injuries received during marriage, if you must cover as mentioned before, if they're not internal abscesses.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Bleeding is an opening of veins that occur without normal circumstances. And when the bleeding has aged, it becomes sticky; and we have described these in division, alongside their symptoms and signs, and I will describe those which require treatment here. I say that the bleeding and the sticky substance, when they come through mucus, do not show upon touch, except with iron treatment. Those found near the mouth of mucus can be felt, so are ones that can be treated. Therefore, it is necessary to place the woman in a cold house, then expose the sticky substance under forceps, and apply a paste in its roots, then dust with medicine that restrains blood such as comfrey and dragon's blood and incense, among similar things; then bind her feet for an hour at the site of bleeding, then immerse her in cold water; and if there is still bleeding from mucus, one should have it treated with a decoction made from sumac and peel of pomegranates and garlic and such like things, and then take barley flour, mix with honey and saffron, and apply as a plaster on their back. And if they stop bleeding, that's good. If not, if heat causes them to bleed again through their backs or breasts without injury; then take wool, and make it into the juice of plantain or elderberry with old wine, and let it warm her body.  And when the abscess settles down, she is then treated by ointment until fully recovered; and that which is called 'albathir' is red, resembling one large hard lump, and should be treated as described for the sticky substance; and then treat her again until fully recovered.
des apostemes de la marris	Dealing with abscesses of the mucus.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Various ways of abscesses occur in the mucus membrane; such as ulcers, stone abscesses, herpes, boils, fistulas and hemorrhoids, and other diseases that we have described in section. Therefore, it is necessary for me to describe here the abscess that occurs in the mucus membrane which does not get filled with pus; if you see the onset of iron work, observe whether the abscess is inflamed at the beginning, full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red then you can see it. Therefore, do not hasten to pierce immediately, but wait until the pain subsides; and then have the patient lie on one side for an hour, with two small pillows under their knees, supporting their back and ankles towards the outside of their leg; and spread their buttocks apart, place their arms under their knees, and tie them well with a bandage; then direct the urine towards the right side, and prepare the tool used to open the mucus membrane which comes after this form; and it should be that when you see to use this tool, you first make contact with its tip to determine the depth of the mucus membrane, so that whatever enters through the tool does not penetrate deeper than it should, and does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is too large, it is necessary to cover the depth of the mucus membrane with cloth so that the instrument does not weigh down on it; and it should be that the bellows of the instrument goes above, and it sharpens the tool. And when the abscess opens, and when you squeeze it by hand gently, then cover it at the top with a moistened linen cloth or turpentine oil; and place the cloth inside the wound up to the depth of the mucus membrane, and put clean wool outside on the mucus membrane and under the knife with another piece of clean linen in water that has been boiled; then treat it after two days with an ointment suitable for this, until it is healed; and never raise the mucus membrane and wound by urinating into hot water and honey, or water where lilies and long aristoloche have been cooked; then revive with ointment. And if the wound has recovered in the mucus membrane, you must avoid iron treatment but treat it as we have said in section.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Profession is foremost in the art of midwifery, knowing the natural process of birth and its signs. When you see a woman's abdomen enlarge and desire to bear odor: then the child begins to exert force with its head coming forth; at that point, you know that this birth follows the natural figure and proceeds from the head, followed by the rest of the body; and when you notice these signs, gently pressing her belly is appropriate so the child emerges promptly. For when it descends through the head, it brings the rest with it, expelling its excesses into the world through proper expulsion. Any other manner does not occur naturally. It comes out once on its feet, or out of strength in the body or shoulders, and hands, or out from her belly or back, and can unexpectedly be turned around its neck by unfortunate figures; thus, it is for a midwife to be wise and subtle in these matters, aware of errors and deception, and I will show you all the forms on how she should assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	When the child comes forth through its head by natural outlet, and the woman labors heavily in childbirth, and her strength is weak, make her sit on a stool or have women hold her; and from this nature where fenugreek has been cooked, then place the midwife between her hands with the small spoon that follows here in form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And cut the second part, and remove up to his moisture until it's completely out; and support the woman's belly as her child descends; if she does not descend, you should administer a catheter of fenugreek paste with poppyseed oil to her; then make her drink and cough condisi water; hold her mouth and nose for an hour: if the child comes out now. And when both hands come out, it is necessary that you gently guide them little by little; and if they cannot enter, put the woman on a stool, lift her feet up high; then remove the stool from under the ground, scrape the woman, so she doesn't leak during childbirth; and if her hands can't go in, and the child dies, cut the hands with the knife that was prepared beforehand, extract the child, and treat them equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	from the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	And when the child comes on its feet, it is necessary to lift it up.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn a little bit by little bit, until it becomes even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then hold two pieces and extend them a little bit by little bit.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can it jump up to the thighs, if one tries to grasp and hold onto it, causing it to emit an odor of suspicion;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it should jump away, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it doesn't change like what we have said, if you turn it a little bit at a time, as long as it follows the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Therefore, handle it lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it doesn't respond as we have described, take up a masticated almond, and oil of saffron, and dissolved gum, and grind all this in a mortar to the size of a grain.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and place this balm inside and outside the woman's body.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	Then have them lie in tepid water up to their ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	And when she is moistened up to the waist, have her take one tablespoon of myrrh and place it there, leaving it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then have her sit on a stool, then make her sneeze and keep her mouth and nose open, gently rub her stomach, for the child jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the birth of the child upwards to his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, if you place their hands little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then support them at their neck, and let their legs hang down below, and stand beside the bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and bend their hands little by little, then hold their hands on the belly, and remove the cushions under her until she is settled below.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child jumps, take their feet and forcefully move them upwards, then move their head to the belly, then thrust your hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And gently take hold of the baby; and instruct the woman to bear it as long as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the birth that occurs when a hand comes out during delivery.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to engineer in order to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If one cannot bring it back, then make the woman lie down and walk away;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, I advise making her lie on a bed and supporting her legs upright;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	and administer the muscle relaxant I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she doesn't give birth, make her sit on a stool, then try to guide the hand back in;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And guide the child according to its natural form, and make it sneeze, and instruct her that she should remain in prayer until the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue of the child at its neck, and spread its arms, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that you scratch his hand, then turn it little by little, and gently guide it;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when they are equal, place them in the natural lifting and oiling motion of the hand as we have said, then instruct her to move them little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	And when you have done this, if she wants to sit on the one chair, and you command her that she should pray; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner for all the second half
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it proceeds in this way through the second half, if the second half reaches up to your nail, as long as the moisture is drained;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if it descends even to her face and her neck, when you reach the throat, let nothing be held back, so that the infant does not die;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then place the child inside, until you have positioned it as it should be, and instruct the woman not to try again in any way.
adonques si istra legierement.	Therefore if you gently pull it.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the passage of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	You know that twins are born often, and sometimes three or four at a time; and this is not an unusual thing, it just happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two things are removed, and do not live anymore, if one does not name them;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know this, for they multiply and are destroyed by the sweat which produces them, which is linked to the belly;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And they also do not come out naturally like all under us, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they hurt intensely, apply the treatment as we have described, and take care of the subtle wounds, do it quickly and gently according to what she does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	do so as is most beneficial for health.
de plusors enfans	of multiple children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	They are not married for many times; one or two or three or four or five or seven or eleven, or even up to fifteen, and they are all made to resemble a child according to the beauty of their appearance.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	And he must know all this because such things may happen to him;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	if done as it should be.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you are treating a woman who has lost her dead child or is experiencing an abortion, as I've explained in the division section, if the fetus does not come out and you are forced to intervene by manual effort;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	If it is necessary that you know if she has healthy virtue, and does not have an accident or she fears death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If it is necessary that the woman be strong on her back, and let her hips be inclined forward, and the legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and apply a hot iron to two inches, or if she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated during the childbirth of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the midwife with moist olive oil and a mixture of coriander and fenugreek seeds, as well as linseed. Then anoint her hands with these oils and mixtures;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then press down gently on them, then you should know that when the fingers are placed under it,
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take care so that if the child is prone, it descends onto its head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if you insert the fingers into his eyes or neck or mouth or tongue or under the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs.
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if it descends to the feet, you should insert or grasp and at the middle of the back.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is necessary that he cuts the navel with his right hand, and puts the curve between his fingers of the left hand, and drives him gently with all his hand, and pierces the navel in none of these parts we have said, until he comes to the thing empty;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the form of the navel:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then pierce against another navel, or use the third if you need to, so that the extractions are even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then extend them evenly by moving from one side to the other, so that they can exit smoothly, and make sure the navels are toothed to keep them in place, as this is their form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if any part remains, let some oil be applied to each of his nostrils, and insert it in that part, and extract the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if no part remains, place this salve or higher on him, and do this until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes forward of the other, and cannot be brought back due to being restrained,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	If this happens, you should cover it with a bandage until it comes out completely;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then press at the joint of the heel or at the cut, and thus you should do with the other hand, and on both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's head is large and it is stuck at the exit, or if it has an assembled sharp head,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	Then you should push the sharp spinous bone between your fingers, and make the head and remove the sharp one;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	Or you will have it with the tool which is called "almidach", from which its shape comes with the tools or chapters that come after this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and so make them grow to large size naturally;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then pull the bones with tongs,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the shoulder pops out and is held by force, until it breaks, as much moisture or worse comes out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, you should remove it piece by piece as you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is swollen in the belly or around the ribs, it must be that you pierce him as long as the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on his feet, it causes light pain, and the flow towards the mouth of the vein is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is situated in the belly or under the breast, it must be drawn out to about an inch wrapped on the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and apply until the belly or chest area where moisture flows cease.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if another bone is fractured, and the shoulder remains,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	if they bind his hand up to the tip of the maris bone, and guide it until it reaches the mouth of the maris;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then I pour in an ounce or two, and I push forcefully;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the maris has narrowed due to an abscess that was present, it should not be operated on;
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	Then it's necessary to administer wet and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the treatments include plastering, and also soaking in a warm, moisturizing bath.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is under their ribs, and you can put them level, then apply what we have said about live infant care;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if you cannot do so, split the treatment into parts, and do not leave anything for later.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, let those who we have described as coming to the wound clots that come in the menstrual period handle it;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if there is a bleed coming out, so that water or cold restraint may be applied, and it receive other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whom there had been an abortion of a fetus, then examined another on that spot, and found it also to be abortive.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time he developed an abscess in his mouth, and it inflamed so much that when opened, it began to cause severe pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was summoned for the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and couldn't find a way to heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed on a strong plaster, and out came a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because the belly should not have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought they were bones from a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I sought the wound and handled bones as long as the woman was in better condition;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And I tended to the woman for a long while like this, and there was just a little blood coming from her.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I remember this chapter being useful only for those times when masters find an unfamiliar thing and need to know how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To return the arm to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Following is the form of the presser, which the books refer to; and in two turns for each shoulder at four joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Always, let the horns be more subtle than the restrainer, and make them of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the pipe be one hand in width, and the rim of the trees half a palm long;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And when both these ligaments are two adjustments of the same wood which should be firm in one and the other, half a palm long or slightly more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	And these two adjustments are fixed in the mouth of the artery to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, similar yet more subtle and lighter, can be made of wood like ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of forceps;
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and have two heads with two adjustments each, as you see, one palm long, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	And when you see the wound open to its entirety with all the instrument, then make the woman lie down on one bed, her hands hanging and her legs spread apart,
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then join the two joints together in the wound, and hold the head of the instrument under her armpits;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	work your hand with all the instrument, just like you would with pincers equally, according to how much you see opening in the wound of the animal, until the bone performs what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	All this instrument is well mounted and has multiple similar counterparts; and when you have them all set up, the work progresses more quickly, and they are higher for their size when compared to others.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not breathe with the tool when you have equipped it, because your need is unacceptable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second part is retained during childbirth, if it should be that you command the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze through consideration, and force your hands against her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she jumps because of this, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If this does not work, take one spoonful, and make another spoon or cover, and place herbs that can open the woman's mouth, such as chamomile, rue, fennel, matricaria, bitter almond leaf, and hyssop;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, or any of them, be cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then take a cane or the other end of the pot, and the other head into the mouth of the patient.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and hold it until the vapors come from within the patient; then make them inhale, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If you jump to the next one quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment and is not better, then command her to moisten her left hand with oil of sesame or musk paste, and then apply the bottle to the body.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And she seeks the second one; and when she finds it, if you grasp her gently and extend her gradually straight, so that no hindrance is present during extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but she must be moved lightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it will come and become loose.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if there is a constriction in the throat of the patient, as we have said, treatment for coughing and herb fumigation will be necessary.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if she doesn't respond to all of what we've said, remember not to force the treatment;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that the one at the entrance of the vagina ties him to the belly of the woman, then anoints her with tetrapharmaceutical ointment;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if the urine flows and returns, it will come out forcefully; but if she does produce urine improperly, there is a bad smell coming from stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, the use of suitable fumigations is necessary: none of the old ones have proven the efficacy of fumigation with sowthorn and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to fumigate a woman during retention of flowers and secondine is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it resembles the appearance of a stick, and you place the delicate head into the fire, and the joints widely at the flame.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And let there be fumigation over the coals, and the application until it is emptied out, then start another one.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	And in infants who are born without having their foundation pierced, rather it is weakened by a subtle sickness:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore, when it comes to the operation, she should puncture where it is necessary for her duty, and do not puncture midway in her anger, but guard the incision so that it does not touch.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply a wet paste of wine and oil, then do the balm treatment until there is no blood.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt it won't re-attach, then apply a piece of treacle, and let the area heal for days, and remove it when the child starts walking in the chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And always remember the sudden healing of wounds or abscesses; if it is necessary to treat this suddenly, then do as we have instructed with treacle.
de la fistule dou fondement	From the fistula from its base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas originating from the base are congealed and grow larger than those coming out of the bottom inward, or in the space between the two parts,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is one fistula or multiple; and when that congealed mass is old, it works, and eventually brings out moisture in white or fine grains,
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And these fistulas are internal; and they are known by the person experiencing an expulsion or windiness when the patient expels, and sometimes a sensation in one direction.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if the fistulas penetrate up to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and reach up to the knee joint, and up to the root of the scrotum.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows that the fistula penetrates to the bottom completely, and not at all.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And it is such that you pinch your index finger or base, and insert a fine needle or spider's leg or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has twists and turns, then you should insert a fine tentacle or one of a horse's hairs, as long as you feel the tentacle or hair on your index finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of pus or wind, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	You know that the wound does not open up; so hurry to treat.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is nearly to the bladder or nearly conducted by urine, if the urine jumps out of it and cannot be united with medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced up to the junction of the thigh, then the veins coming up reach up to the knee;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no tortuosity and the origin of the pain is internal, then it means that it occurs internally, and does not benefit from medicine or a simple application.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And for these Persian fistulas, there is no cure other than effort and the vanity of those who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In cases that are neither Persian nor old, there is hope for healing through iron, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And it happens that the sick lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his hips, and keep his hips inclined towards his abdomen.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then use an araneus pot, or a spider's web if there are twists, until you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it through their foundation, then it is necessary for you to press your index finger onto it.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	Then you will sense that the tent has pierced it; and if you feel between your index finger the yolk or the heart, then you know it is vertical.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If there's no confusion about which one it is, then you can't determine its nature.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One can indeed properly heal most things, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the help that one provides, if it involves heating the delicate cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was explained previously;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and hold the flame inside the fistula until it escapes from the base; and do this twice or three times, as long as you can tell that these burnt particles resemble a bird's feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then cleanse with wet cloths smeared in grease, until those burnt particles come out, then apply the ointment to bind and seal it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If he is healthy like this, it's good. If this, then otherwise cannot be healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if it is tested inside and doesn't pierce up to the root which is the foundation, and between your thumb and the tent you find a thick covering of flesh or fat, and when you see the fistula at that spot where there's no covering under the skin;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If it covers from the beginning of the fistula and sticks right before the tent, then apply the cautery after that, until it reaches to the tip of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	And the tent will be freed and fall out; then remove those fat lumps that resemble a bird's feather, leaving none behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if it doesn't affect you, and there is a cut between you and the wound, then apply either a fire cautery or a medicated ointment.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For fire cauterizations consist of two main things: these include the brandishing of these heated rods, and bleeding the wound and drying out moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then perform the treatment on wet cloths that have been dipped in grease or ground substances, as long as the limbs are bleeding, and let the heated rods burn inside them;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound with tourniquets made of thick leather, and apply dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it heals and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes just up to the edge of the foundation, and is removed from the body, then cut at its base or foundation, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	And if you feel the tent, and there is two of it or something similar, or it is about to pierce, but only has a way of faltering and hope left, through the administration of one of the three ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut until the bottom, or if you can use two tents and treatment in the first manner;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And do not go too far inward, that you might damage the structure holding the foundation, and allow the discharges to come through freely of their own accord;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then apply the cure, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	By chance if it is clean, or you remove that covering and cleanse it then where it was removed from the foundation, either by trial or with another tool directed towards it;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then cleanse that flesh which is in the wound as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then study to restore the wound, and to prolong the fistula in the lower part of the foundation: if it is lighter matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And always make the tubercles in this manner: and when you press into the fistula and it is on or near the foundation beneath the skin above,
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	take a tent peg through the head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I pierce two threads intertwined together, and push the tent peg along the entire length of the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it's purely within the margin beneath the foundation inside, then extract the thread from that torn one, just as you bend your finger or foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and pull the head of the thread, and unite the two heads together, then hold one to the other, and let it rest for one or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and hold it in place each time until the threads have grown into those grooves that are between the two sides, and stick together.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound until it is healed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If there is a fistula that does not pierce, make it pierce through all the ways you can, as long as it's not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there should be no need to make the insertion too deep beyond what is necessary, and then treat it, as we have said, until it heals properly.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spinous spur from which the fistula is made is firm and small, and cutting into it;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on another side, because there's no need to cut what shouldn't be cutted, as you see here:
des emorroydes	Of bleeding injuries
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Bleeding injuries can occur in two ways: either they are within the body's foundation, like a bit of resin, and there may be small or large ones, causing blood to flow out.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	Or if they are one or more, and extend beyond the body's foundation and to its head at that foundation; but those that extend so far have little moisture,
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	Or they are accompanied by a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and have the color of purple;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment for those who have them within the foundation, so you instruct the patient to let them grow until they reach chambers, as long as the foundations pass through them, and their filaments are visible.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hurry, or you hold it with pincers, or you keep it by your nail, then remove it from its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the thorn cannot be held by its moisture alone, take it with two fingers, or with cotton, or from a piece of leather.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and pull them out with your fingers, then remove them, and apply some warm powders that are used in cauterization.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	When you cauterize them as it is said or as per the chapter on cauterization, then treat with other treatments until they are clean.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the roots cannot come out, then cauterize the bladder cutting and grinding to wash what is or the roots, so that it may come out freely;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	If the bladder doesn't swell and if the threads are strong at the root, then the treatment is gentle;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And you should take them with your nail or tweezers and pull them out, then treat them as we have said, until they are clean, and when there's fear of cutting by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	If it is necessary that you stitch according to this method: take half a twist of thread and attach it to a needle, then guide the thread from above and pierce the needle from another side, and loop the two pieces of thread around the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if you want it wider; and tighten the thread neatly, then tie the thread in a knot, and remove the needle, and do this for all of them, and leave one to drain off excess blood;
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then place on the wound one moist cloth in oil rose or plaster, and place it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it grow as long as it is scarce, and when they settle, if you treat with oil and other remedies, until it heals.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	do drying through sweat or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times, there is a drying in the intestines and due to the nature's compulsion, and when the disease is old and medication does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you clean up to the tip of a thorn or around your nail with the outer skin, which should not be left wet;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then the cure until it becomes firm as it should;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot become firm, then restart the shaving with more force than before, until some heal, and be burned;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then continue the cure until it heals.
dou fremit	with shaking
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Antennae are a small false appearance on the body, and they go forward;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And whenever it touches skin, one feels a sensation like death due to tremors, and it spreads throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment involves taking a stick made of goose feather or a strong vulture's feather, and placing this stick on the tremors until the purple circle stops all the tremors;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then twist your hand over the entire stick until you cover all around the tremors and place it forward, thereby eradicating the tremors from their roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, do this to a spider's hair or iron according to this form, and let them be slender underneath and piercing above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Don't pierce it, for you will hold onto both ends and squeeze it firmly. And if you see the twitching (of the wound), so like it is in front or chapter of the cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	in the shape of a bladder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a bladder of silver or tin, or melted spider; and never make these small and large instruments according to their intended uses.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those then are treated in the care of children and those who are weak and painful, being small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the bladder is small on top and large below, or the belly is arranged in this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and there is an opening where the belly might be squeezed, as you see, and the head might penetrate; and there are two small projections on one side, and one on the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and have the belly or place where we put medicine in a beast's bladder or parchment, and it should be pierced all through with small projections,
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And place between each piece one and a half inches of space, then insert in these pieces one thick thread made from woven linen for ten or fifteen times, and stitch the belly as if it were a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And when the medicine is inside, tie it to the tool with a strong thread first, then seal; and this forms like a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and smear the opening of the curet with oil or yolk of egg butter, or something similar, then insert it gently;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then, with the doctor's two hands joined together, pull until you can see everything clearly, then remove the curet, and lift the patient's legs up to their chest.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if the medicine is to come out, it should be pushed as much as possible; and if he sleeps all night, that brings more aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you have diarrhea due to a bowel obstruction disease, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if there are hemorrhoids or a fistula, or an abscess, then use a catheter as thin as a child's finger;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it is the form of a thin catheter on which the skin is constrained:
des plaies	from injuries
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have discussed the treatment of wounds in the previous section; now we will discuss hand care and medicine according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I state that wounds are various depending on how they were caused, and where they were inflicted, as well as the reason for their occurrence.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The causes of wounds include impact from a stone, the strike of a sword or dagger, or by a spear, staff or cudgel, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	The instructions are made according to the body's joints, for instance a wound that occurs on the neck, or head, or breast, or belly, or liver, and similar body parts.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with head wounds since memory will come to his chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a single wound comes or to the head, and if no bone is broken, be careful whether it's due to stone or similar things, and if the skin has been torn completely and the wound is large,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you slightly doubt about an abscess there: if it heals quickly after a scalp surgeon, even if there is little blood from the wound, and it gets healed in contrast to the necrotic part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And the organs fill with wine and large meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if it does not wish to improve, then reduce its meat intake, and do not drink wine, nor eat any flesh.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And in the wound, if pus is present and comes out, use damp cotton soaked in rose oil or only in vinegar;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no pus present and the wound is fresh with all its blood, and it's not being disturbed by the air, then apply powder, which I will describe a bit later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has healed, then apply certain ointments, until it is sound.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a tailor's cut and such, and the edges cannot be brought together with stitches, then join them by suture, as I would say about wounds in the belly, through suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound exposes bone and muscle, and only holds together slightly when held in place, if it is closed. Then treat the wound with medicine, and replace hard flesh instead of skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instruct the patient to consume large meats, such as brains and cooked wheat, as well as chickens, and similar items.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find or leather corruption, and it does not reach to the bone, then cut out the whole corruption, and pour in some water, then clean it;
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if it have been an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut out the artery, and if you find that it is dislocated, tie it with a thread;
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not benefit at all, then apply cautery.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should put this powder on which bonds together like when the heat of it has spread.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And here is how the powder is made: take some incense; dragon's blood .ii parts; powdered basil .iii parts, and finely ground it.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	And apply the powder to the wound, then press it firmly until the wound is well aerated and joins with all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And then cover it properly, leaving it to heal without any swelling; for the medicine is not removed until she is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And this is done only once with charcoal alone, when one does not have the incense or the blood of a dragon, but that the surgeon has cleansed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the surgeon has cleansed the wound, even afterwards, one does not apply this powder at all;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but instead applies some preparations as ointments, or oats flour made with water and honey, until it starts to heal;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then continues other treatments until it heals completely.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if there is bone breakage with the wound, and it's small, then use fine needles to mend it.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about fractures of the head later.
de la plaie dou col	from the wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	This wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between this and that on the head, but if the vein or artery in the neck is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's the nose, if there is no other instrument than to let the cure alone, and not to put any restraining thing, because it harms the nose and makes it recede;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And do not place anything cold on the wound, for the substance of noses is cold, and its extension to the head goes with the brain, which is the highest part of the body;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let it be warm medicine instead, such as charcoal washed in soft water and mixed with rose oil, and also wash the lettuce in the same soft water,
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	And other stones of the mine according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, so that it needs to be bound tightly, then treat until it is clean.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and full of pus, then pierce them or even deeper;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut and bleeding ensues, then open it and stop the bleeding; if necessary, perform cauterization as well;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	And if it's cut from the throat or the knees, or if the guide is kept, by which the flesh goes,
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if you stitch the knee above the string of the throat, and do not touch the throat but set it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then stitch the addition, and leave it for a few days, then treat with withering ointments until it heals properly;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has formed in the bone, you should treat it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	And if there are bone fragments, remove them thoroughly if you can, and leave those that you cannot retrieve until the wound heals.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And evacuate it and strengthen its exit.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, use the powder I've mentioned on it.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there's bone in the wound and there's a sinus, treat it as I have said in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from the wound of a spear or a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a wound from a spear or a knife, and the wound goes deep inside, then look at the condition of the wound to determine if there's any wind escaping: knowing this means that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	And if it is not deep and its blood flows fully fresh, should one not apply the powder or bind it up in the first hour after, because the blood would not stop flowing from inside.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and warm him to the heart, and rest the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I apply an attractive ointment, and fasten it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you do not have an ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture.
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	have the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four, or longer;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if no spasms, lack of heartbeat rhythm, or singular movements occur.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see good conditions, know that the wound has been saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Therefore treat it with various remedies and other treatments, until they are healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot heal and fester, then know that there is a fistula; treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from an incision made by a sword or knife, and it is simple or worse, or on the back, treat it as the one in front would.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it's large, stitch it up; and if it's small, powder it; and if it's compressed in the bone, and has cut into fragments, clean the wound and remove any foreign bodies if they are present.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they aren't removed, let the wound heal by itself, ease out the extrusions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on other limbs, judge them as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Regarding the protrusion of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The belly's protrusions are large, medium-sized, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From a major wound, it might cut the intestine, or its nerves, by which the organ invades;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	And the suture is more complicated, and nothing beats a smaller wound compared to a larger one,
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	Because in this case, we don't put the intestines back into place as easily, unless they are returned gradually;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	Because when the intestines swell up just as they feel cold, they go back inside further.
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	And because of this, one must drain the infected wound, for if we move the intestines back to their place that the others do, it is good.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	Know that the rupture of the belly occurs in four ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	The two common incisions occur at the abdominal seam,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	And the suturing of other wounds from the body, along with two other types of wound-specific suturings, are common for other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And nonetheless, they are more precise when done on the abdomen, and I will describe each one and clarify them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that if the wound is small and there's nothing of the intestine exposed,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	And when dealing with such injuries, this can be managed in one of two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when he is cold, warm him up in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	dampen a sponge or use one third of a cloth dipped only in water,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	When you cook with boiling water that splashes and contains myrrh and thorns,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And let the intestine expand as long as the inner lining is perforated;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And do not make this wine stop steaming, and when it becomes mature to relieve swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water that is hot or has been boiled and seasoned.
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	For with this there is very little room for error;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, they make a slight incision with the tool used to remove the maggots;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	And the first treatment is to dry out the wound,
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that we should not cut it without great necessity, nor allow it;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And this is the instrument to split it:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut through the curve inwardly but not outwardly, and see this shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if you put it back according to its natural form within its proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	then do so if you can, for this helps with movement.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide and it's on the belly area,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	if necessary, make the patient lie on their back.
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and raise his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it's located on the abdominal area,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	then raise the head and buttocks higher than the abdominal area.
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also if there is a rupture in the belly located in one of the two parts.
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	If you understand this, let the part that is removed be higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And thus it should administer what I say in large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	Small wounds require this which is adapted to you,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	Then have in your hands a minister of plasters that heals the whole wound with his hand,
et assemble les levres;	And gather the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and this is the common way of stitches,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and you should take one or more needles according to the width of the wound's quantity,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave at the start of the wound one inch in space, and I insert one needle with one good strong thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	And pierces both shoulder bones through the skin with both ends of the siphon wire,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which goes through the skin from within, as long as you make it pierce that part.
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and connect both ends of the siphon rod with three assemblies;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then tighten a double thread around one needle for two parts,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then gather together both ends of the injury appendage,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave one finger's width space, and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then weave the thread in the same way you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and continue doing this according to how you are skilled with needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until all the wound is contained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and are of needles that range from fine to thick,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because the thin needles cut all the flesh well, and the too thick ones do not enter properly:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	thus they should be of medium thickness;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	And it is not proper to leave the needles too deep within the flesh and the skin.
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	And they do not cut and spread the wound before the healing;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then remove the heads of the needles, so they do not irritate the patient at night;
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I place tents or cloths over the heads of the needles to keep them in place;
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	And let them grow until the wound has healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this kind of suture with needles is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because it requires only one needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second type of stitching is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	And it is that you assemble the two pieces of skin and the two ends of the flesh together onto one needle where there is a strong thread in the middle;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	And when you have pierced all these pieces four times,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	then remove the needle from where you began, in the manner one sews with threads;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and place a space between each stitch the size of one-third of a coin;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitch tightens the skin,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sew a wound that had opened in someone's belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was cut by a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was larger than a palm in width,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and if they are of good length, two palms in fact,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and it was located in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I returned the intestine to its place, and by that time, it had been twenty-four hours since it happened.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound healed up until fifteen days, and I treated it, and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And when the patient was thought to die, it became a wonder;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and did not cure it with ointment, for I was in one place where none could be found, nor any remedies;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and changed the old cloth on the wound twice a day, and washed it in honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and start the thread from the outer part up to inside here;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has pierced straight through to the bone, if it's at the siphon or costal area where you have inserted the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make it pierce from the inner part outwards to that external point;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and for this seam, do as the marten does with furs, by sewing it in such a way;
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And you must allow once the stitch on one side, and take it from another, until the suture is entirely completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of sewing, as Galen correctly states,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	If it is like what everyone does, who join the two parts naturally together,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	And they press one end of the thread to the other end, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	Stab with a needle or pierce near Mirach's heart, and make sure to only pierce the left side.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the two shoulders free at the neck;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle and pierce it from below up to this depth inside.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as the two shoulders at the neck;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then pierce both from below at the outer part up to that inside, in two other shoulder joints which are opposite each other;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the way it is sewn and the most common method.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galien says this word, and no one affirms it,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	One should stitch the belly with two needles, or where there is thread in each;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And it requires one to push a needle out from one side, and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew wounds.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	Know that when the rupture is within the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	The stitches are more dangerous than those of other wounds in the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is as follows, just like the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	And know that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as soon as the art has spread it,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	if it is inside the intestine, and the cut; then put on the powder that makes it inflame,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if the art has spread it, apply no ointment until the wound heals over;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And stretch out the thread, and stitch up the skin, and bind with a bandage;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as usual until it is clean;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you don't have medicine, apply old cotton, as soon as it starts to ooze pus.
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and stir it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you need no other medicine besides when there are simple wounds;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound will cause infection in major body parts,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	then it is fitting for you to soak a light wool cloth in lukewarm oil, or in rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and place it inside the armpits, and under the arse;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	And if there is pain or rotting in the belly, and many times it happens.
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	If black wine enemas are given, and similarly when such rot comes up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And if it penetrates deeply inside, know that when it's regarding the large intestine, it is easier to cure than the smaller ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine called "juvenile" cannot be cured once it is injured,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	And it is due to the presence of veins that are present, and through the subtlety of all the body, and the approach of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the pus jumps out of the wound, then put it back behind in the same way as the intestines, while it is still fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it has become old and turned red or black, then you should tie the part that is black, so that no bleeding comes thereafter,
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	because there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	Then take the one between the ligament,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place both shoulders up to just beyond the wound area until they facilitate extraction when the ribs are pulled out, and when the wound is made.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the bladder
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are intact, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if it can be restored in any houses,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	for I see that some nobles were pierced or wounded by a spear;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, causing discharge and wind issues;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied a cure according to what I knew, and didn't stop refining it until it was effective, and the patient was healed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it healing, I wondered if the patient might have pain in their abdomen;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	There was no harm, but it improved and ate and drank.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And they would tell any experimenter that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	Take large thistles, then join the edges of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	And when the thistle has opened its mouth, place it between the two edges,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	so that it closes its mouth upon;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then cover its head, and this stays so that it cannot come loose.
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	Then after that shaking comes another one in this way as before, until the wound is fully taken care of;
et cout la plaie.	and till the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	Those who are so hard in the intestine, and do not cause any harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	And one can tie the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
en teil maniere:	in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	Take the head of this thread of intestine that should be much shriveled,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie to the head of this thread with a thin linen thread.
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Then thread the thread onto the needle, stitch the intestine, and set it during surgery;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this method of stitching wounds is done solely according to the path of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and broad, especially when it's in one of the intestines, if there is no obstruction or healing, ensure that it's due to the subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	from a fistula, or if it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that every wound or abscess, as it matures, is universally called "fistula",
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	And similarly when it is sealed and begins to heal.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	Fistula refers to a condition where there's a firm, hard, white swelling around the wound that doesn't cause pain,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And it also grows like feathers from a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And no single time in a clear jump, and another time thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Neither time faintly, and another time sufficiently;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken about the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh,
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	this is only due to one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	This means:
ou por sa malice;	or because of its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips that prevents new growth.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or because there is too much blood;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	The ears are inflamed, and the substance is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	the treatment lacks good medicine;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption takes on a manner of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or due to the property in the region being late for digestion, and delayed healing, and escaping naturally.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have shown all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies with medicines in this section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	So it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas which is performed through manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistulas can occur in all limbs and their joints;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or at the stomach, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it affects the function of the main body part, and manifests similarly.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all sores of this manner are difficult to heal, there being no exception but labor and lack of knowledge;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is no sore that reaches the one I have mentioned, and you are engaged in its treatment,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you should know how to do it; take an arachnid tent or a iron tent, if the sore is straight, then use it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the sore is twisted, search for a delicate plunger's tent,
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for when they bend they move in the complexity;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if they make a hole at the ends and you can't find it well by trial,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if you try to use a syringe through one of them,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for moisture can flow from one end to another and cleanses the area;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	Then carefully use your skill, to know if there is bone or nerve, and whether it has hair present,
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask carefully from the patient about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and locate where it is felt;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and once you truly know the location of her (indicating a patient's discomfort or pain), and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the locations I've mentioned, check according to what I have told you,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And the bone has need of the surgeon's hand and the chemicals that are within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then the treatment until it is healed,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula has been well excavated in a straight line, you should fill it up completely as far as you can reach,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then I will wet bandages with a quenching medicine and place them until they cover the entire length of the fistula.
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	As long as the medicine dissolves what has remained deep inside;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then I place healing ointments that nourish new flesh, until it heals properly;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	And if it doesn't heal with this method, then I will cauterize it as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if the bone is rotten due to pus, then I will treat it accordingly.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerves are injured or members are affected significantly,
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	And if the bone is exposed, and there's decay and darkness, then you should operate until all decay has been removed.
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cleanse everything that can be cleaned until it becomes healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it doesn't become healthy, then continue treating as before.
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	You are to let the hairs grow until they are long and uniform; and if they pierce at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they fully grow.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if you uncover and want until you reach the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all the decay, then put back into place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it stays thus healthy, it's indeed well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	But if not, know that corruption is too deep, that you cannot reverse it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other way except leaving to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there's even a small rotten bone, and you can pull it with tongs,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if you extract with an instrument suitable for this,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are many bones, if you remove them all, do not leave any;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and should moisture oppose this and there is no doubt or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if you combine heat, moisture, and flesh, and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something on the wound that prevents gangrene,
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and leave it until the flesh around the bones rots away.
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	then they will have the bones more lightly afterwards;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it's a large bone, such as in the thigh or leg,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you merely remove the corruption as long as the blackness is entirely removed,
puis restoure la plaie;	then heal the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there's a large part of corruption, and it reaches up to the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it is necessary to clean and cover up until the corruption ends, and then treat until it has healed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	And I will tell you of a case of an abscess that occurred in one's leg.
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you may take it as an example and gain aid in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	It was a young person of around thirty years old who experienced pain in their leg due to an internal source within the body.
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	The materials moved towards the leg and resulted in a large abscess formation; there was no apparent external cause for this opening.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	But due to their lack of understanding, they would open up as much as needed for abscesses to drain.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and they chewed away some materials, and formed a fistula, and much harm ensued that caused great pain and moisture from the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	And many surgeons took care of it for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of surgery.
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	until I came to be called, and saw his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And that which moves through the narrow passages with great force;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And it would turn red on their cheeks of youth, and had a golden hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I dug a tent in one of these passages, and then sought all the passages,
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I hurriedly did so, and dug in one of the cavities until I discovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and found it putrid and perforated, and the corruption had reached to the inside of the bone;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I was the one appearing to me from the putrid bone, and I thought there was no other corruption, only that which I removed;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to heal the wound with medicine over a long period, but could not stitch it together;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	And then continued, uncovering the bone just as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	I found the continuous corruption in the bone, and I cleaned it out, then removed it, and bent to solder back together the place;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not do that until I copied inside half the thickness of the bone, and then I set it to its full extent,
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	Then I treated it with medicines; and it was healed and united quickly.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	And could no longer resume the work except for due to the weakness of the patient, who cannot endure,
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and out of fear of death that I have for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but it was completely cured,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and a hard flesh formed inside the bone, and it was well arranged and had no harm or opposite effect at all in every way, neither inside nor outside.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if any bone is broken anywhere inside the body, it should be treated in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take hold and strain at the tip of the bone that sticks out,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command that he extends it upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	And take another thong of wool thicker than the first one, and tie it over the flesh that is coming out of the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and let the head, so that you can pull the rotten flesh away.
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and expose the flesh on the bone where you see skin, making sure not to hurt the flesh;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a piece of charcoal or a board over the bone so as to cover the rotten flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And always strive as much as you can see and feel the decay, and strive again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is decayed and does not open, and decay exists inside or in a part of it,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	then reveal all the flesh; then place one coal over it,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then continue to apply heat from one part to another of the decay, and keep the iron hot for as long as the decay lasts, just like we have explained;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if the corruption is within the joint, if it cuts the corrupted joint, and whether there is bone on either side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if the corruption is in the continuity of those two joints, if there's no other angle to cut through it;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	And if the corruption is at the base of the hand or near the ankle, if that thing is very strong,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	But nonetheless, you must inquire about that corrosion, how it opened to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And cleanse it in all ways that you can, but that the vein or the nerve do not oppose this.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	And know that the saw and the needles for coping these bones are many, according to the setting of the bones and the shape of the bones,
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their size and their fineness, and their largeness and their smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this, it must be equipped with each form of work its tool;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	And know that this work will show you the instrument you shall need, according to knowledge of this art.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and it will testify about the ways diseases happen;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	so consider the tool you need according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	by fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head moves either by cause within, or by cause without;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	And when you have treated that corrosion with the remedy of medicines, and if they do not benefit at all,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	Then it is necessary to cut off that limb up to its joint where the corrosion occurs,
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	so that the disease escapes through this way of death, or through the evil, which is greater, of the fault of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	And the signs are such that the limb turns black, as if it has been burned by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and after the darkness, then comes this member-corrosion to and from the limb,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and spreads throughout the body; if you hurry with copper treatment,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	And if it's due to the impact of some venomous beasts, such as sea spiders and vipers and alike,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If the corrosion is at the neck up to the second joint, if you cut it, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, if you cut at the joint, so that the corrosion does not extend up to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	And if it extends to the arm, when you cut it; and if it goes beyond the cut, that is where death occurs,
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and there's no cure other than its potency amount.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	And so you do this whenever corrosion appears or a piece of metal does: if it appears in the first joint, then you take out after another joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it appears on a piece or metal, if you remove all the metal;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises to the leg, you remove it at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes from above the knee, there is no other way than to let the patient die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	And the method of covering or sewing the limb is such that you tie it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	extend one surgeon's hand along this ligament from below, and another surgeon his hand for the other ligament upwards,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you expose the flesh that is between the two threads up to a depth of one finger wide, until the bone becomes visible;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then sew or suture it, and place a piece of linen on each side, so that the stitch does not touch the healthy limb,
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And brings another injury and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And when blood loss occurs during surgery, if you quickly cauterize the wound,
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or you put some止血 powders on; then return to your medicine until its completion,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then bind the unaffected limb with a reliable bandage, and treat it until it heals;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	And I will tell you about what happened at one house on a certain day:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	He had a blackness that seemed like an assured fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	And this corruption came first to his foot of the right leg, until it encompassed all the leg;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	When the patient saw the corruption, he sought to cover the leg, and was made well;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	And long after this, there came back the burning or soreness of the hand, and it came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I placed things that would resonate after the cleansing of the body, and could not stop the burnings;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	yet he insisted that I touch his hand, and I refused, hoping to reflect the substance afterwards;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	For the strength of the ox was weak; and it completely lost hope, and returned to its land,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and it would cover its hand up, and became calm;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have only included this for those who need to do something else with it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	No abscess occurs in the inner flesh, and stays so long as to cause a large gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then pierce and drill, and in this way does the bone, and remains the patient's vision, just like some vessels.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	And the skin above is as fine as a single piece of cloth.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	And does not extend up to the bone or nerve, and such diseases are called "simple" in this manner.
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And it is not referred to as a "fistula".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it is so long that it reaches up to the bone completely, this is called a "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And for cooking, if you have to peel the skin all over completely, and similarly when it's very thin, like a piece of cloth;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and doesn't rot due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have ensured that the skin burns and there is no corruption.
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And the skin is thick with flesh, if you perform lithotripsy like this:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Look if his breasts are large, and the belly that contains them has a stinking smell,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Then perform lithotripsy using an Egyptian medicine as described here:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take anise, oil, and stibium, in equal parts, and cook them together in a pot on the fire for one hour,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	As long as the medicine is red, and thickened also like honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take of this according to your need, and make it with water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and instill it into the womb, and keep it compressed;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	leave the medicine in for two hours, then remove by rubbing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Perform this method repeatedly, until both breasts are freed and the milk is drawn out;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and in no instance is it treated with water from ashes;
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medication isn't available, and you need to use vine wood ashes, then pour water over them,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then drain it off, and administer an enema, until you know that the breasts are well emptied;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	And if the patient cannot bear it, neither can the Egyptian medicine nor the ashes' water help.
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if he uses a enema of water and honey or has a bit of mercury to apply;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you use an enema made of honey and mixed wine, where the honey has properties to purify and cleanse,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes one feel well;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	And when you have done this, and have ensured that the chest is well cleaned,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if you prepare with what helps to bring forth the flesh in it,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and that you prepare plaster of quicklime, and make it with rosin oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you prepare the suppository with various medicines and applications, about which I have described the properties or treated of the applications;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	And if his breasts are small near the chest, and his nipples cannot enter the anus,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If someone is large like a metal rod somewhat, and one places an Egyptian ointment tent on them,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	Or the basilikon balm, as long as it is made large;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	And if the wound is too large, let it heal until only enough for a single orifice of the chest or anus can enter.
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the broken part of your body is above where you want it to be, then lift or move it up higher than its current position.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	And when the bone is in place, do not let any excess flesh interfere;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the chest area as you see fit,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	then arrange it in such a way that the bone is at the lowest point where it should be,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For when the body is whole, there should not be any lingering wound.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the breast properly as you see,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	so align in this manner: have the body move smoothly downwards, and do not leave any part of the body unattended;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take restorative medicines to place inside the chest,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	And there are patches of one cloth of linen covering all the chest;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then add padding to the area that overlaps slightly on the first quarter of the chest, where it is about an inch wider than the first.
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	Then apply a layer of grease made from fat on another piece of linen according to the size of the overlap.
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	And place it on the overlap on the chest to relieve the wound, but do not remove the large cloth except after several days once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	And the one who is near the tip of the breast bone, often breaks the rib to remove the lung,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	Know whether it comes from the lung, if it's poison or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	And take care if the patient feels pain or no, and whether there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	And when your medicine has spread in this manner and you see the nature that jumps towards the tip of the breast bone,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	If you know that the breasts have grown already, come close with your care;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then release it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if you change another dressing, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts discharge undigested matter after several days, know that they have not grown yet.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle veins are cut after a long time, do not lose hope for recovery of health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	yet health approaches. For there are people who delay the healing in their wounds, and for those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if one feels indigestion starting soon after several days inside the chest, know that the chest is not healing;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the lungs are slow to breathe and seem distant, then adjust medicines of dried substances in form and dry ones for their effectiveness,
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	As with the transparent ointment, because there is a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take the transparent ointment, and mix it with rose oil, and rub in old wine that has an equal consistency;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	Then cook it and use it; and do the same thing using cooked honey thickened with it.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	When there is no transparent ointment available,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	You take myrrh and alemond, and incense, and grind them, and mix the powder with honey once it's burned;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then in glue one part of a cloth, and place it on the chest, and each time administer to an arbitrator for a long period;
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	And the roots of celestial lilies, which is also like flour with cents and catmint;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	And in using simple or compound remedies: grind them, make into powder, and put on the honey I have said, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	And if the treatment takes a long time, and is not treated by this cure,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	So know that corruption spreads outward, and makes an impression in the bone, or on hard limbs, or at joints;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If the treatment for the pus-wound, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	From the incision of the nail.
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panarice is an abscess that forms under the nail of the hand pouch.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or on the foot, or accidentally forms in other parts;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it has aged, and if no care is taken, so comes one shoe abscess,.
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and they run and spread until they reach the root of the nail, and by chance they might reach it completely;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And comes the corrosion up to the bone, until it causes painful stench, and the shoulder joints become wide, and the color becomes sallow.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have instructed in the division, and the treatment does not benefit.
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	It is necessary that you remove all the excess that has remained of the nail,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The fire cautery is very effective if the bone is healthy, and the joint is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the joint presses on the flesh and begins to pierce it, and irritates;
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	it is necessary that you place the heat under the joint so that it does not burn the flesh.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and apply the flame at the top, and gently scrape off this delicate flesh.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And place on the wound, for healing purposes, hot and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cleanse the wound as long as it is clean.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion extends into the bone, then cut and remove it forcefully, for as long as the bone is rotten, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	And if you see that the joint has rotted, then cut and remove it in one piece as we have discussed before,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat him as long as he remains healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if he is fevered and has pus, and feels intense pain, it should be that you first heal him;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the nail near the source of infection across its surface,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and be careful that the cut does not go all the way to the flesh under the nail, for it would cause too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, place something above which calms.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain deepens from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	You must adjust what is born in the hands of some people by chance and are thick,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and sometimes it has bone or lacks an angle,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	And none are born at the root of the joint, or birth occurs in some places where we must not.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those that are born at no spot on the joint do not move,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	And those that are born at the joint of the bone, by chance might move;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of the one who is muscular becomes so light in this manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it down to its root with a broad spur.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those that start at the root of the joint are issues to cure: if you hold onto copper, it is effective.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In those that start or should be at the back end, it's necessary to first cauterize until you reach the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cauterize the bone with a suitable copper rod, then treat it until it is clean.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The decisions that come together at the shoulder joint arise from birth, or due to injury, or through burning by fire, or through similar occurrences.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary that you cope with this welding, so that it should repair according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two wet tents or cloths in oil, so they do not weld together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you should place between two pieces of fine lead, until the ends are welded, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If we are to weld it with the palm side towards its edge, then perform this welding as would be fitting.
Des vils	Of low quality
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Vices are thick veins wrapped around the body filled with melancholic superfluities, that come from multiple members of the core;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more occur in legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It follows that you must administer one purging of bile to him, and then heal him with basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The iron treatment has two methods: one involves cutting the wound and letting out black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other method is that you open the vein and let it bleed completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The bathing ritual proceeds as follows: immerse the first leg in hot water very strongly until the large veins become fine.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then hold the leg against the ailment from above the knee up to the part under the knee;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then cut the vein at one, two, or three units, depending on its width,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then raise and drain the black blood to your hand from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the healing virtues of the ailment can bear;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then place it (the wound), and instruct that it be oiled with black-cooked meat juices.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And start evacuation and cleaning whenever the veins are filled up, and it harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The method of treatment is as follows: raise the leg from the patient, if there's hair;
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then immerse it in water, and raise the leg in hot water until it turns red, and the veins swell;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you don't have water, heat it on the fire, and then apply the heated area along the length of the leg from thigh to ankle, or in the part below at the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then cut the skin with a razor, and scrape the vein from each side, until you see it when you touch it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and you will see red and black, and when it enters the skin as well seems like a white thread;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then cut with a knife until it rises above the skin, and then cut into it with a razor lightly.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then make another incision one-third above three inches; then scrape the skin over the vein until you can see it.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then raise it on the rod as you did before, and proceed to another inch as you did at first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then take a different size or multiple if needed, then lift it and shape it on the thumb tip,
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then guide and lift until you reach the second size; then gradually increase in size as much as it can withstand strength, then shape it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot guide and lift it, insert a needle at the end with two thick threads,
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And you will find it and pull it out, and push it off at a distance of one arm's length, and turn your hand from side to side until something comes out;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And make sure it doesn't get stuck, because if it gets stuck, one cannot pull or lift it, and it causes harm to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have pulled it all out, place wet wool in wine and rose oil over the wound area; and treat it until it is clean.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the limb is twisted and bent together as one, and it isn't straight, just like we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	If it is necessary for you to break it forcibly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which you use the screw is bent, and does not cut, so as not to pierce the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And it has a large curve, for if it were thin, it would pierce the vein, but make it thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
De la voinne civile	From the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil without moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and may also arise elsewhere than on legs, and this happens due to the corruption that comes from below the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	likewise, if it originates within the body like snakes and worms, it manifests between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if there are signs at the beginning of this vein's condition such as a severe inflammation in the leg,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	Then change his limbs, and soon enough blood begins to flow out, like a root from a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the shoulder is opened, it must be enveloped internally with a piece of plaster as long as half three and up to six inches, and then bind it,
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	let the plaster hang down on the leg and every time there is any shortage, cover it internally with plaster again and bind it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	if it's too long, cut a part of it off and redo the plastering making sure not to cover its root until it's fully out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you handle it, it enters into the body, causing pus and decay or disease.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	By that thing, it is necessary to treat it carefully and cautiously until recovery, and leave nothing behind or injuries;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	And there should never be a time when this vein is treated for as long as five palms, or for ten;
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	And I have experienced that when it is treated for ten palms, and when you handle it, if it lasts for one or more days after, and cuts it until the bottom,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	If everything proceeds as planned; and let the substance inside be drained, and apply remedies that combat putrefaction daily, then treat it like abscesses thereafter.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And never use wet hands for this, and likewise when the leg opens at its joint with the foot, or the foot itself,
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And most of the injuries come from jumps and where they are wet; thus treat them as we have instructed before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Worms that emerge between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "beef illness", because it often affects cattle,
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and a small worm is born between hide and flesh, and it travels throughout the body going up and down,
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and it is felt all over the body member by member, until it reaches the skin where it was going, and leaps out;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And it is infested with corruption from certain fluids, if snakes and worms and roundworms or maggots are entering the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	And there is doubt about his disease, for when it travels through the body, and ascends to the head, and reaches the eye;
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	By chance it enters, and destroys the eye; this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see him being treated and drained, one can only wonder that when it was:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	Therefore, it is necessary for you to bind it above and below with a strong bandage tightly.
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	Then cut upwards and pull straight, and if it is properly inside the flesh, you won't find it.
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If you apply the hot cautery to it, until it heals;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And the most severe injuries that it causes, if they go into the eye, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see it coming or the head close to the eye, then restrain over him the eyelid, then lift upwards, and pull forcefully;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	And it is necessary to use the application of purifying oils from medicinal waters for the maladies caused by internal imbalances,
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and if there are complaints about meats causing putrefaction.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from wind.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to any limbs,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and spreads from member to member; and I have seen what I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was summoned to attend a sick woman, and she uncovered her arms for me, and I saw a small swelling in the arm vein;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and just an hour later, it rose as if by a worm to my shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	Sooner than anything else, like quick silver when it is cut off from another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	The pain leaves that limb and penetrates into the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	And then a little later spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then I saw that it was spreading internally within the body as well.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed at how she moved member by member in such a way, for I had never seen this illness done in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	In any case, I have wanted to establish many that well wanted to move the pain of their own to another's.
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I did not want it like this, as I see in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that was because the woman had a soft body and her veins exposed,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And because of this, a constraining wind appears;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and do not appear according to this reason among those who are delicate, and have damp bodies and responsive veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you see the cure of this illness, and if the patient feels pain, if it appears to you like we said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	if it increases upwards and downwards quickly, and then treat with remedies until that constraining wind leaves the body.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	And apply a cautery to the wound; and if you cannot see it at your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if one treats the dislocations of winds, such as stinking pills, pills made from rattlesnake venom, and similar others.
Des saiettes	From arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are various, according to their appearance and according to the nature of the animal they come from.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of them is such that there are those with large tips, and small ones, some are hairy, and some are soldered;
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and there are those with two angles, and among them are those that have tongues, and of those where there are pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and the one that defecates in no member does so according to two ways: or in the primary member it is hairy,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	just like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When she gives birth though, then not at any part of this body, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, becomes apparent:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	It is necessary that you prepare for the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in various stages;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when that bad sign does not appear and the arrow is not fully extracted, you should extract it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	The symptom of brain injury occurs when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, causing damage to the structure above the brain.
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	When there is blindness and numbness and swelling in the eyes, as well as inflammation and redness of the tongue,
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	or perhaps affects the nose or ears; and by chance it deprives one of speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	there is a white moist discharge resembling pus from the wound, and in this also like burned flesh from meat;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if you notice these signs, take care of the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it's there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it strikes or penetrates, is that it is near the left breast, and also feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And by chance the arrow also stops moving like the hair, and causes black blood to come out, and coldness, and cold sweat, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Therefore, with no doubt, know that the person is dying.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that doesn't leave the body is that it bubbles up from the wound without much foam, and the throat swells, and the patient's face changes color, and they sigh loudly with their breath.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if an arrow stops within the buttock's covering, it penetrates below the small ribs; and causes great pain and much agony, along with sighing; and all parts of the body from the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow stops in or near the stomach, by chance it may spill any undigested meat from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow stops in or near the belly, and it does not pass through the intestines on impact, there is no hope for treatment, nor in removing the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow stops inside the bladder, and the urine flow is interrupted and spills out, causing great pain to the patient; know that this wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the arms and shoulders and neck and spine and ribs and hip and pelvis, and all similar limbs, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it's not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you did something else.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened at two thirds of the distance that an arrow struck him in the armpit at the root of the nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tested it, and tried to extract it from there across the fat behind the ear, and was left without any serious injury.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And take an arrow to play with, let it fall into the oil grease underneath the paper over,
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	And the arrow was returned, yet one could only touch its tip towards the shaft,
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, weighing only one pound without feathers; the game was successful, and no ill events befell him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And take an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and this is the Arab's arrow with feathers:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I shaved them, and trimmed as much as I could during my treatment, until they were healthy for Christian people.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And then extracted an arrow at one's body or stomach, and thought it was fatal;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and after it had passed thirty days, if it did not change its position;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow, I set it in motion, and pulled it out, without any bad incident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you wish for one arrow that has fallen or stuck either at front or back, and found the wound healed up above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and stays the arrow inside, without disturbing its natural positions,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor finds any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And for another person, who got an arrow wound in their face, and found the wound healed;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And he must endure such great pain; and there are no other similar phenomena.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And draw out an arrow at one stroke for the king's princes, where it was stuck in his side.
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and it was slightly leaning towards the right side; and the arrow was entirely out.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called for treatment after it had been stuck for three days. I found the wound extremely narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I sought out all with a subtle test, and did not feel it at all;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and there was pain and hurt throughout her right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on a healing plaster for the arm, because the arms did not swell;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And appeared to me the head of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I applied the plaster for days and resolved the wound immediately, then the patient suffered long thereafter,
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	Until he felt the arrow within his nose; and he told me this.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I applied an aqua regia medicament to the wound for days until it was opened,
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	And I tried it, and felt the tip of the arrow which was penetrating towards its place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I adjusted it by opening the wound with this arrow-wounding method, until the head of the arrow became visibly apparent;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and punctured deeply to the inner ends for four months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	then I stretched it so that the wound opened wide enough for me to insert my tongs, and I did this on both sides, but could not force them through.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	Therefore, never stop refining and inventing ways to create tools, until I got possession of one day with very well made tongs,
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to what its shape will be at the end of this chapter, until I try it, and will repair the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And they judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	So I would repair it, and then the wound was sealed, and the patient recovered completely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	And I told you about the nature of extracting arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you apply your treatment to what I do not say, because books cannot encompass everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but the wise masters will agree on a small amount of good, and on what is current and lacking,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	find nine works, and the ninth tool, for the removal of things that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not emerge from the limbs where they are embedded, rather than in two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or at the point where they enter the body, or from another direction;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And if it jumps when entering by itself or at the point of entry, that is the arrow entering the flesh, and it will jump not once but multiple times.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it doesn't jump now, let her go as long as the body is raw inside and well drained of its juices;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And also if it is embedded into the bone, and cannot be removed, if you leave it like this for several days, and remove it each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then she jumps out, and if it doesn't jump out, if you pierce through all with a small bore (foret), as long as the bone inside is widened, and then treat it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if an arrow is embedded in the skull's bone, and goes up to one of the brain's ventricles,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and none of the accidents that I have mentioned appear to the patient: if not to cure it straight away, but let it stay until it is equal after a few days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	For if the arrow reaches just to the joint, this is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow only pierces through the bone and does not reach up to the joint,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and leaves the patient with no bad accidents for some days, if the extraction goes well.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is only deeply embedded and cannot come out, if you administer hot baths internally, as I told you; then treat the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if an arrow is placed back into its socket within the body where it cannot be seen, one should search thoroughly for it.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, try to pull it with any suitable tool;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	And if you cannot do so because of the tightness of the wound, or due to the depth of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then widen it as much as making the wound large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and when you can pull out the arrow, if it has ears attached to which it is holding,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if the bone that is stuck in at two places, at the place where you can reach,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as long as you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And make it subtle so that you do not break the arrow, but pull it more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot remove it in one go, when the shaft is already deep into your arm, then proceed with its removal, because the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if bleeding while you're working against it, apply what we have instructed in its treatment within this chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and be cautious about the incision near nerves and veins, and do it in such a way that you can remove the arrow without risk.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	whether hot or cold, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the shape they were in when the arrow hit them,
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	for it is the greatest help for you if you can, and if you cannot, place them according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another side, or if there is any sign of it, or if the skin is swollen in that place where we can see or feel it obviously:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Therefore cut upwards, as long as the forceps can take hold, and then pull: if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, rotate your hand around, until it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, let it still, and then start extracting again until it comes out forcefully;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if there is an arrow in him, once he has it, push the shaft all the way out.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	And if it's a vein and you see to administer pressure, do so with one of your instruments.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	if the tip of the arrow enters the hair of the tool; and then force it out,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is stuck, I force the tool with pointed end entering in order to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is bent, it is necessary that you take all the flesh around or where I am, if you can.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then treat the wound as it should be done.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if an arrow enters or wounds or is in the belly or bladder or ribs, and it's close by, then you should cover up, if you can cover.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And guard against covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound; this is a task for a skillful person.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And treat the wound until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used for arrows resembles that of an eagle's beak, and here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are of many kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the arrowhead is also like the feathers of a bird,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	by pushing at the tip of the arrow, as this is its form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape for pressing and gripping is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of the veins through which one is purified are thirty-one, from which there are sixteen in number.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	This means: Two small ones after the ears, which are called 'the two herbs';
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	And the two arteries in the two temples that can be seen;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	And two veins that are within two eyelashes, which are called "suckers";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	And the vein that is within the forehead; and the vein that is on the head near the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two jugulars which are at or around the collarbone;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are in the cheeks above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called 'bubbling';
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	And two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins which we commonly cure are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One is the cephalic vein, and it is under the left rib, and they call this vein "the arm vein";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the middle one is called "fasting", and it is made up of the cephalic and basilica veins,
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	And they call this group of people "the vein from the heart"; and the basilica is either on the right side or under the rib.
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	And they refer to this as 'the vein of the belly', and it's located above the kidney.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And that is the one which is treated, whose opening becomes apparent through the scrotum.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the salve well is the vein that's between the index finger and the ring finger, and it has two parts;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	And along the leg and at the foot are three veins: one is located in the bend of the pocket on the left side of the body,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second one is at the ankle on the right side of the body; and the vein that is called "nasce", which is in the ankle on the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other leg are three veins next to these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The health of the veins that are behind the ears helps with colds and headaches, and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	And the qualities of a healthy person, as I have told you, and that your head of the hair behaves well,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	And rub the area where the veins are with a coarse cloth; then pinch the neck of the wound with a needle,
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until you can see both veins behind the ears in each earlobe over the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Search for this then on your chest, and where you feel the pulse under your chest, if sir it's in need;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the scalpel, and make an incision down to the bone along the vein, then lift your hand all up to the vein upstream,
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Cut and remove the skin and the vein well two inches deep, and let out blood until you see it flowing;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then tighten and hold, until it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already spoken about incision and cautery, or in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The bleeding from the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it goes to ancient inflammation,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and also, and habitual conjunctivitis, and within the body of feverish tears are their eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the quality of the surgeon is such as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	And it happens that the patient strains their throat until both veins clearly appear;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	And they feel the pulse at both wrists, and then judge from there.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	Then lift the hand over the vein at your wrist on top of your index finger, and hold the scalpel nearby,
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then lift the vein at the top, and pinch it, just like you did with other veins, and drain the blood according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then release the patient, place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton there;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then reapply the bandage and keep it in place until it heals; and we have discussed about this as well as their treatment and extraction, or beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The treatment for the vein in the forehead is as important as the treatment for the cephalic diseases of old, and it includes migraines, and hotness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its quality is such that the patient twists his neck, until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the tool which is called "cautery", whose form is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the tip on the vein, and pierce with your hand or something else, and let out the blood in accordance to the quantity you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then loosen the collar for the patient, and bind the vein until it is clean and without any trace of blood;
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	All the same, it is not right for the flames to be too strong; and treat them from across, because the bone is close by, and by chance the flame could break when they are fine.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The treatment for the two veins that are in the two arteries helps the eyes, and at the pulse, and the heat, and in the ear with the ear, and diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their treatment is that the patient tightens his neck by twisting around some ligament, as previously described.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then the treatment proceeds, and the treatment should be smooth through, slightly longer than the flame a little wide, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle and might break by chance; then make it correspond to the blood flow until you have the need for it, and then bind it with cotton, and bind well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The treatment of a neck ailment involves cutting through the jugular vein near the nose, and surgery for disorders, and diseases of the face,
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	Similarly to migraines and redness that appear in the face, as well as when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	And the quality of this treatment involves constricting the neck of the patient and then pressing their nose with your left hand;
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	And take the slender flame, and insert it inside the mouth at the space between the two nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	for the vein does not open well there, and the wound will now begin to drain;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not burn too much below it, and bleed the wound gently according to your need, then rest it for a night, as it recovers very quickly;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is how you treat with heat:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The healing of the two glands helps with squeezing out pus and at the beginning of mixing illnesses, and in the occurrence of diseases, and in congestion, and corrosion, and in herpes, and swelling;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of healing is that the glands are tightened around both ends, just as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and let the master be above the neck of the gland, and the gland lie on one seat,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then heal the vein so that it is slightly wider along its length, then drain the blood moderately, or as much as necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	Then redo the operation on the other vein, then release the knot, and gently constrain the veins in the middle.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	Let the patient rest until morning, so that the wound heals; and if it does not heal, then one should cut out the diseased tissue.
De la sainie des leivres	Regarding the treatment of wounds
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The treatment of veins in the mouth helps with cleaning the mouth and prevents gum decay, lip cracks, nosebleeds, and internal bleeding.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of health is to make the sick person stand before you, and restrain their neck in the way I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the lip, and look at those two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left;
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and know them by what they are black, and because inside them there are thin black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	then feel both of them, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	If you cut out the largest of each part, and do the same for both upper and lower veins, because it's the same method.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From the cure near the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The cure of the veins near the tongue assists after the treatment for head ailments, and this is done at the constriction of the throat, and it deals with eye diseases, and with mouth illnesses;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of the surgeon is that when a patient's illness manifests before your hands under the sun, and you raise their tongue, and look at each side revealing a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Therefore, treat both healthily, and do not go too far with them, because they are near the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the arm that we commonly heal are treated in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or they may be heated with just one flaming firestick, or with a fine olive stick if the sticks are narrow like that of an arm, and it's called 'anesil';
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they should be wide or fine according to the size and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of fire cautery is quite famous and is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it requires opening the large veins filled with obvious blood clots, and containing substantial blood and disorder;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of the olive oil cautery:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more refined and pointed, intended for cleaning out subtle veins, or for the presence of subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The treatment of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat, and in the neck, and around the chest, and in the belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is fitting for the surgeon to treat carefully, and to guard against the artery that is there.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he hits the artery, and bleeding ensues, it is necessary to staunch the bleeding, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And it should not be clamped with fire, but cut like a hare.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open clearly, it is necessary for you to extract it, and change another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	or you want no pain from it, or you pierce through its place with the vein into the arm: it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and cover the flame area beforehand, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you know the location of the operation, it is necessary that when you remove the arm, you touch the area until you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then mark the point of insertion, and then tie the arm, and close the vein before it heals.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And make sure you do not cut into the artery when you see the area inflame, for that is part of the artery: then listen there.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it bulge up as high as a child's urine, and the veins are red and fine, know that they are veins from the artery: be aware of this.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Then hurry up quickly, place your finger for a long time, then remove your finger when the vein is no longer bleeding, as has often happened.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	The patient must hold their arm, and let it stay like this, without moving the limb. Do so with caution, and don't move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound is not cleaned, and you need to, and the medicine is not available, if you can, stop the bleeding by pressing on an artery if it's accessible, because the head of the body retreats; clean the wound once done.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	Take a piece of elm bark and cut it, then take one half and bind it well up to the other side;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If the wound stops bleeding, that's good; if not, clean it as we have instructed, using powders that stop blood flow.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the dressings are not made wet in many arrangements because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the connection of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The healing of the vein midway assists so that it treats blood from above, and from below,
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it consists of the basilica and cephalic parts, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	And for the surgeon it is necessary to be cautious about the nerve which is below, and if he doesn't go far enough, and he finds the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it inflates and health is harmed, and by chance cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any places due to its intricacy, then you must sharpen the surgical instrument beforehand; and feel for the nerve with your hand.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The healing of the forehead helps, as it brings blood to the head, and aids in the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is advised to use the olive oil flame or the myrtle flame, for this is the safest of all veins, because there is neither nerve nor artery nearby.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Always, it's necessary to seek the lightest weight, and one should not be upset if it fails the first time, and one should attempt again;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance swells some limbs at certain points, even if it fails the first time, but there is no cause for concern.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of cleanliness is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about surgery is that it is practiced solely for maintaining health,
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to avoid future illnesses;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and have surgery performed in one of the three veins that are or cut: this means, the cephalic, the femoral, and the basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and surgery should be done at the beginning of prayers while kneeling, and in autumn and after winter following meals, when the signs of fullness are evident;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	And whether one should heal on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days and one night.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The treatment of diseases does not have a set time limit, but only when the need is for one day or for food, at all hours and in every situation;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not appropriate to treat children up until 13 years old, nor pregnant women only during the first quarter of their pregnancy up until seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	And one should not treat the elderly who have passed sixty years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone seeks to heal himself, no matter how, it is necessary for him to purge his intestines with a gentle laxative.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	If he has much of wind retained, so that the veins draw off the excesses causing nuisances to the principal limbs;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Nor will he be healed who is too full of meats, or drunk, so long as they have strength, or are those with dropsy.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And if one undertakes to heal after colic pain, vomiting, and stomach discomfort, or frequent urination, pregnancy work, staying awake, sexual intercourse, or anything that weakens the body, as from weapon injury or injuries to oneself.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then refine the fluids, if it's excessive, through meats and drinks and medications, should you have that means;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	Then in a bath or immersion, if nothing defends it, to refine the blood,
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and cleanse you from the vein down to three quarters of the inner part of your back, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and protect yourself from that day of labor, and of pain, and of excess, and from similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	And bind and fasten them, and let the bandages be higher than where one is treated, and rub the arm twice or three times.
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then gradually adjust the tie, because when it's too tight or too loose, one can't correct the limb without it.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the arm with your hands until the veins swell and are felt.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then wet the bandages with a little old oil, then place your left hand's finger on that vein below the arm a bit where you want to apply pressure.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	If the vein does not exist and fails to be cut by the sword.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that flee like strings on a violin, and some of them are full of windiness.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	such that when one places them over the flame, they retreat to the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus one is of those;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if it opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, for which reason one should have surgeons acquainted with such matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if their veins work the first time, it's good; but if not, you may start again a bit near where they were or under quickly, if the area is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the limb is swollen and the body feels itchy, you should let it rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	In case it comes to an abscess near the skin; don't go into water baths, then try starting the cleansing again if she likes it;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the wound is small or the opening in the skin is subtle and you doubt that not enough blood is coming out as you see, instead pierce it right into the center of the wound straight to the end;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And do it a bit hastily, so that the ears are swollen; for this happens many times, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see that the ear is inflamed, do not repeat the cure and place a bit of oil on it instead; for it lightens the body from blood, and heals in this area where the oil is applied.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And apply the oil when you perform each cure on veins, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	And when you apply it on the ear, this thyme and honey works well; the oil is too fine if it's in excess, but if it's too large, it disperses and avoids being too heavy.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if it comes about that there is a large abscess, which happens often, just as when the strength of the wound only allows for such an occurrence on that single occasion or when the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	if you are in haste, and place on the wound a sponge moistened with water and wine, let it be warm for just a little while, and then apply it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	it is necessary that you perform this after the bleeding from the vein has subsided, and if it remains on the wound for several days without turning black or green, it does not harm it at all;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see that [the wound], place on it something of myrrh or balsam made into a paste, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times pus and appearance occurred in the health of the basilica: therefore put your hand there, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, then this is the bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Listen then that you do not apply to any matter what we have said, for it could be done accidentally on the artery; but let him wear one bandage dry to harden the place, then treat with another method of care until he is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And take each according to their strength in their virtue, and the nature of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if the blood is black, let it bleed until it turns red. If you see that it's large, let it continue to flow until it becomes subtle. And if it's too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is suitable for one who is clean and strong, needing extraction of blood, that you make him larger wounds, and let the flames be wide;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is suitable for a physician to be careful and often, and when you need to treat him, cut diagonally rather than straight;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of treatment saves from the spreading of blood and compression of nerves, and it is better than a long cut rather than a wide one.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for the one whose body requires treatment, it is suitable to give them porridge in juice from green apples; if they are heated, cool them down with blood three or four times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if the individual has a cold disposition, they should consume before the holy meal a broth with moist ingredients in a syrup mixed with honey or in an aromatic syrup containing spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, along with a well-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if they faint during the meal, after the release of blood, it is necessary for them to inhale a broth of flesh and a subtle-smelling syrup,
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use the other things that we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if they wish to sweat in their arm and again later on, when they are weakened by a great meal, it is necessary that they sweat gradually and according to the amount of its virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if one wishes to pump out their arm after the first cleaning, and they have strong pulses, should they do so seven hours after the first cleaning, or after the new hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wishes to be cleansed another way, then it should be done on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is much blood within the body that has already heated up, and causes fever; so it should be drained in large quantities, and widen the vein until pus emerges.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	Then when you have fulfilled all the conditions of cleansing, and place your hand on their pulse when they are healing, so that the disease does not remain in its place.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	And this happens many times, when the surgeons are negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not right when you see a dislocated arm and make blood come out the second time, and when the wound has healed, that you press forcefully;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if it is set straightened, should you quickly extend the arm, for this would be badly done;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it until the second healing; or you apply to the tip of the flame, until the blood that was frozen at the wound flows out.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	And place on one part of it a small piece of sulfur set alight, and gently press on it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is bleeding, let it be, do not compress it, until the abscess subsides.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if the need is to drain blood a second time, do so in their own place or another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein under the arm is cleansed from the side of the main vein because it is composed differently.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of healing is such that the patient holds their hand in hot water, until the fingers turn red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then bind them moderately, so that the vein appears well, then heal now through it, not too wide nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and make them narrow at the ends, and heal well near the wrist joint, and if it cannot come out, then put your hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the water, until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is like that, do not put your hand in hot water instead, because you would freeze it more than heat it;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the healing of this vein is safer than all others, for it contains neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The cure for saving the right hand from diseases of the liver is akin to all illnesses, and this is how it is done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Stretch the hand, and soak it in hot water, until the vein becomes visible;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if you heal it from side to side, and if you press on it completely all around, without causing any pain;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and do not overheat too much at the beginning, because all nerves are entirely stripped of flesh,
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then immerse your hand in warm water, because if it's frozen in the wound and cannot escape.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, place on the vein where and seal until it heals quickly, and do this with each case.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health in the left hand is against the disease of the mouse (or smallpox), and do everything as I have told you for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The healing of the soul is valued for all diseases that are within the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	just as diseases of the liver, and obstruction of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of old arms and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of this healing is such that patients are healed by being rubbed with hot water, and they are treated on the vein until it heals.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above it goes through much of the kidneys;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Let then the wound heal, or more widely spread outwards, or at the ankle joint, where movement suits.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the leg bone, watch for the nerves that are nearby, and also treat the artery in the same way as cutting; may the flames stop there.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot be removed, then place the leg in water, and let it well drain the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if it needs healing the first time, then try again the second time above a little bit, because the leg is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt about nerves, as we have said, and do the same for the other leg equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The muscles of the sciatic vein are at the knee of strength, and its health is valued for the pain in the hip, when it's due to fresh blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its health is such that the patient sweats or bathes, and tightens above the ankle by扭ing for four inches,
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	because otherwise the vein does not open; and if it does open, it benefits in all ways that you can, and even when crossing over;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And value to move it when you have it in your hands, for the head is there, and it is very responsive to human touch.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you cannot find it, if there's no opening or protrusion in front or behind the foot, and towards the small toe, be careful of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And make sure there is such an amount of blood that you see, and then untie the knot, put on cotton and tighten it; she is now cured.
Des sainies de ventouse	Cure with suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Pessaries are made from horns, or spiders, or snakes; and suction therapy is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this suction therapy that involves piercing follows two methods: it can be done with any heat, or without heat;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	And suction therapy performed by piercing and blood extraction is carried out in twelve rounds of the body.
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	Of which, one is entirely on top of the head; and the other is under the neck.
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	And two others on two ribs under the collarbone; and the suction cup over the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the suction cup on the two shoulders; and the suction cup above the pustules;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the suction cups on the two arms; and the suction cups on the two legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the suction cups at the ankles; and the suction does not remove blood, but only minor veins that are scattered in the flesh,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And because this does not weaken one, as is done with bleeding of veins;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And it should not be administered, nor with any fire or sense of heat, in any disease that comes from overfullness, until all the bodies are emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of diseases one must breathe air or due to habits, then we administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and during and in every period;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are those who, when they need to breathe air, have difficulty with their head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	And if someone experiences fullness and heat within their face, and on their head, and around the neck, and dimness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	And those who notice a drop of blood in their mouth, have swollen tongues, and are coughing up blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if there are people who think, see through nosebleeds and vomiting, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially during the first month, we instruct to take a breath for three hours after each day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The hygiene of the nose aids in relieving the headache ... that comes from the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of all through the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	And this suction is part of the hygiene of the cranial area,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And it should not be used by those who have a cold constitution, or who are catarrhal, because it causes great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And for this reason, those with cold ailments should not use it, nor those whose head has ill diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who often gets healed from it, becomes forgetful, due to this one should place the suction cup slightly further down by the doubt of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	Suction at the neck is in the vicinity of the healing of the throat and the basilica; hence it's effective for narrowing towards the anus.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and through the canal of the intestine, and everywhere else, and with replenishment;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it should be done without applying too much pressure, for if she holds too tightly, it could cause dislocation or indigestion or heart problems.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The ventilation of two ribs under the neck can cause pains in the head, and eye pain and toothache, and in strangulation, and pain at the roots of teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And is in the place of the health of the basilica; and it should be that you instruct the surgeon to move his hand when he places it, not to touch the artery, and not to allow repeated bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilation around the chin can cause oral diseases, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and is in the place of the health of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilation around the shoulders can cause illness due to heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The ventilation of the lungs is as valuable as two-thirds of the veins of the arms,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	because it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and commands the soldier not to cut too close, for the arm is naked of flesh and it runs over veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup on the back is as useful for bleeding from the ground and diseases below it, and it's necessary that the suction cup be large and made of iron, so she can bleed well. And by chance, if it were thin, it would break; I cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs are applied straightforwardly because they draw blood from all over the body and alleviate old pains in the joints, bladder, and kidneys, as well as bloating; and they are located at the knees and ankles, and throughout their use weaken the body over time, leading to debility in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of placing the suction cup is as follows: you place it first while empty and suck continuously, then quickly apply it and move it evenly without stopping. Continue this until you see the skin turning red and inflating, then stop noticing a slight bloodiness; afterwards remove them, and take care with how your body is positioned because there are those who have tough skin and open pores: one should pierce only once in such cases, making broad cuts that are slightly deep; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the lump is large, it should be pricked twice: the first time to clear the way for the passage of larger blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the hair is very thick, it must be pricked three times; and when we wish to draw out a little blood at a time, we should only prick once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we wish for some blood, we often repeat the process; and if the hair is thick, we burn until the roots are fully penetrated, and the ends so that the hairs are pierced suddenly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	It is appropriate for those with thick and hard skin, and who have prominent pores, that you grease the spots of the suction cups where the stimulative and dissolving substances are applied:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in a purple oil, or an almond oil, or a seed oil of the cucumber;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it's in the spring, from plants such as garlic, or onion, or chamomile, or any similar type.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take turpentine oil, or balsam oil, or oil from anise, and similar types.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if what one wants to heal is tender flesh and large pores, there should be no oil applied at all,
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	But it is suitable to wash after suction with pink water, or cold water, or water from a rose, or water from a cucumber plant, or water from porcelain, or any similar type.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has some moisture, if he rises from rest or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And he who has large excesses rises from old wine, or water of the sea, or a decoction of thyme or chamomile, or other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and there is no sanatorium treatment with suction cups before or during the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep afterwards.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it should be noted when he is to be suctioned and when he has been suctioned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And watch over him who is recovering from illness and is choleric, and if he gets too hot and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	It is necessary for him to eat cold things, such as pomegranates, endive and lettuce with oil, and similar items;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And he should consume small game meat, and pork meat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And for those with cold complexions, they should consume honey syrup and moderately aromatic wine that is between old and new vintage. They should eat a little food, small game meat, and young birds such as pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And on the day he is suctioned, then must he drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it should be given to some people no three times or muscat before suctioning, or after, to strengthen the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And season the broth well, but it should not be that those who are hot drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The suction cups that are put to pierce are those placed on the liver, and on the lungs, and in gout, and on the belly and stomach and kidneys and hip, for this limb does not bear being pierced over wounds,
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	And such action should only be performed to draw blood from one part of the body to another,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	in the same way as we treat in childbirth when it proceeds smoothly; to thin out the viscosity in a limb, just like we use suction cups on the belly and buttocks to reduce its size;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and relieve pain when there's an obstruction or stone, if it can expel the obstruction by its attractive power, or evacuate the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and in this manner it works when applied to the liver and stomach if there's retained congestion,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	And these suction cups are administered empty only for suctions; and they are never administered together with fire, and they are not filled with cold water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	Similarly to illnesses due to coldness, and in such a way that one fills the suction cup with hot water, or with water in which herbs useful for this purpose have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup administered with fire is like this:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it has two and a half palm widths in length, and at its center there is a small notch, like how you would place a pin,
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And if it's from a thorn, wait until it doesn't hurt the patient when placing it on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	And have in the middle a crossbar of a thorn or iron, to insert a candle until it's held.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And let them be large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	because the suction cups for children are different from those of the old, and the thin ones are different from the fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And we must place this suction cup thus on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take the wax candle or one line long, and put it in the suction cup through the penis which is inside the suction cup,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the heat is at the bottom of the suction cup and does not burn the skin;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the limb, and hold it at the part as we have said, so that when one wishes, if the vapor goes away, remove the suction cup;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And apply the thread as before, and repeat often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction cup, which is used in the illness of pleurisy, for all severe cases, there should be neither a tube nor a cork, and it is administered only when it's full of water, and placed just on the limb.
et c’est li forme:	and this is its shape:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Only suction cups are used for members where one cannot place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And during their unclothed state, like two or four, and others similar;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And the quality of the water is that when you find veins in sweet clear waters without pus, if you take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put the animal in sweet water until they become accustomed to it, and do not have anything in their stomachs.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then bleed and cup the blood, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place the veins on it.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are full and emit, whether it's possible to place a suction cup, then put one, for this is very useful afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the limb with ease and water, quite well, then the wound;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the limb heals too quickly during the course of surgery, wet it with one liter of cold water and place it on, until the artery is cooled;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if there are multiple arteries, put on powdered vitriol or garlic, and similar items, until it is cooled;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	When you put half of peeled peas on the shoulder, and let them dry at this spot, they will now stop bleeding.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you need more, take others without waiting.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the veins are not willing to be taken, rub the shoulder with fresh blood, or you stick a needle into it until the vein starts flowing.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then place them, and as soon as they feel the blood, let them dry;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are discharging, if you powder some aloes and flour together, or ash, they will soon improve now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book on fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are for restoring breaks and recovery.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know this, dear child, that the leaves of this chapter are filled with content that was never found in any of the old books, nor did anyone ever read a letter from it;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And because of this reason, the knowledge has been lost in our land, for I have never found anyone good;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing of it, for through the knowledge of old books, which I have studied so much that I have dealt with this subject, and through experimentation, and by habit from my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And in this chapter I have described what is contained here, summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the two chapters before this.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary for us to outline or introduce the essence of this book and its chapters where wisdom places her understanding, remaining truthful, so that those who have been proven competent may know and learn this noble craft, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fractures or dislocations or twists or bruises occur anywhere, it is necessary to quickly heal the patient from one side and another; without any damage to them, if things are too delicate like weakness in the body, or children, or old people;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	Or if the place is too tight, or too cold; and eat cold dishes, this means cold meats, and fat meat and parsley, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill your body with foods that fill the veins of blood, until you are sure of an abscess to heat up, or a spreading of matter in the limb; if recover the patient according to their first regimen as they have used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that promote strong healing, or have a thick consistency, such as cooked wheat in water, and onions, and garlic, and liver, and kidneys, and cow stomachs, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For at any time of rupture it is necessary to let the parts move more quickly and soon the breaking.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that bones broken in the old and the decrepit cannot be properly healed or sutured according to their nature due to the dryness of limbs, nor those also which are too tender, such as the bones of young children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	But do not hesitate, set the bone that is broken. i.e. press and unite the limb together, until it strengthens as before; and do not finish his work immediately, and for this you must feed with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures can occur in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For breaking of the head is different from breaking at the ankle or leg, and I will tell you all methods of breaking in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breaks that go to the tip, and others at the joints, such as the size of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it's a broken bone with an injury, or a break resulting in a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And for each method there is its own tool and instrument suitable for repair, according to what memory brings to mind;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And it is recognized that breaking of the bone occurs when the leg twists and opens clearly outward, and its compression under the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And if there is no twisting or compression of the leg, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no breaking of the bone;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it can well have twisting, or a crack, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	But do not move it with your hand yourself, but apply the remedies that follow, and then gently constrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that when the breaking occurred in the artery, and its two parts were separated, it is necessary now to place them evenly, so that abscesses are neither too far nor too close.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if the abscesses have come out, then leave no days until the abscesses are calmed;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then place them evenly as you can lightly and wisely do, knowing that the restoration of this one is lighter than that of one with fragments. Then tighten it, as it should be done according to what follows.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are pieces broken, if it is divided into two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or under your hand if it's one smaller limb, or at two strings, or at one string and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are evacuated, you reset it with all your means by moving them as much as you can. And remember not to cause injury or pain through your work to the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And adjust well both ends of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it well with your hand if you think it's not properly set: if it is set beautifully, and don't over-tighten, or apply pressure as those do who extract abscesses by their own method of contraction in the limb, as we have done many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the member is set properly, ensure to keep it still, neither by day nor night, when turning or in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And ensure well that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, it's not quite right, and it needs to be put in such position that it doesn't feel any pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and see to it that it is placed correctly, so no awkwardness occurs when it's being set back in place;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken member should correspond to what I am telling you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that limbs broken are varied by size and extent and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are smaller limbs like arms and legs etc., so it is necessary to envelop them with soft and fine linen cloths;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	And those that are larger like thighs and legs: it is necessary to envelop them with a broad and hard bandage; for the wide bands wrap around the whole large limb and restrict equally in all directions, so there is no unevenness.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then tie on light wraps around the torso, 3 or 4 times depending on the limb, and hold your hand slightly on every part of the bandage, then go above the fracture and restrain less, so that the fracture can move a bit away from the injury.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And soften that bond little by little, until you seize a large part of the healthy side, then take another ligament and return to the broken arm;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then go back to the part right of the break, and hold it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we said in the first lesson above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then place between the heated linen or cloth bands until they are evenly done, then tie everything above with two bandages, and then put your well-made pins on top; if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something soothing on it for the abscess to cool and relieve the swelling, leaving it that way for a few days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then stretch over them, and have them half the size of a medium-sized reed, or from a staff made of split wood, or from palm leaves, and make them as follows:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it must be that the stick placed on the break is slightly larger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and make it as long as necessary for the smallness or largeness of the limb;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then stretch over the sticks in the same manner as you did with the first piece, and then tie on an additional thread above them, similar to what was done at the first instance for the break;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	The treatment for dislocation requires that it not occur too far from its original position; and it is necessary that the thread be just right in size, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the thread is thick, such as in works of those who bind the strings of linen ropes and cause errors, this is significant; because the binding cannot be uniform if it is too subtle, and it is not suitable for there to be less than half a do of space between each pitch.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patients are irritated by the shoulder blades after tightening during their recovery, place linen or raveled wool underneath them, so that they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by bruising, and the knees are broken, I will tell you the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not right to constrain all broken limbs with bandages on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it is not advisable to place bandages on them immediately; rather, wait for 5 days or 7, or more depending on your judgment each time an abscess occurs.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And here is the method of old plastering to restore breaks, dislocations, and twists: take flour that stays on mill walls, mix it with plenty of eggs, prepare this mixture neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common way of restoring breaks in various positions, just as for adults and children alike, as it's neither too expensive nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: take 3 parts each of garlic, dandelion leaves, rue, and asafetida, along with 9 parts gum arabic and myrrh; also include .v. (5) parts of aloes; add vinegar seven times its volume. Mix this powder well with plenty of egg whites; if the mixture is warm, use this plaster since it has a good composition and heals broken bones quickly, and is effective for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method for plastering that suits twisting: take mugwort and sweet marjoram, add nine parts; myrrh and aloes, add eight parts; carageenan six parts; boric armeniac ten parts, grind well, mix with water or enough egg, then apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another method for plastering injuries and fractures, soothing the pain that comes about, and working with bone: take new wool, and cook it in grease and oil, then put it on your body. This plaster does not heal, but it is better to soothe abscesses quickly, and properly relieves pains associated with bones.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method for plastering that heals broken bones: take dry fig leaves and terrestrial poplar leaves, grind them together, and make the plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method for plastering during the restoration of bone fracture and improving the removal of pus. Take root of marjoram, chamomile, violet flowers, flour from beeswax; each of one part; grind it down and mix with wine, then if your limbs are warmed up, mix it further with coriander water or just water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method of plastering more effectively than the first when pus is hardening during member restoration. Take roots of marjoram and linseed, balsam, mint, winter savory, violet flowers and chamomile; all in one part each; grind it down and mix with salt water or sweet water, or wine depending on the warmth of the limb and its rest period.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Ippocras instructs not to place anything on a broken limb for restoration except cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, stating that it should be neither too soft nor too hard between two.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one should place upon the broken member for restoration, dry things a bit heated, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to plaster for injury and pain: take mussels and goatskin grease or bird feathers, and vinegar, and oil equally, and grind them, and make a plaster from this mixture.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then expose it a little after that, and take care so the patient doesn't feel any pain or the bone moves in its place; if not, then remove the plaster by hand.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the limb, or itchiness, no rest or swelling occurs, then hurry and remove it, apply the plaster now; take a lightweight cloth and a sea sponge moistened, dip it in water, and rinse the affected area until the itch stops and the pain is relieved.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then allow the limb to rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool, moistened in water or rose oil, and secure it with a bandage until you are sure of removing the pus.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And allow the inflammation to subside in the limb, and relieve the pain, then resume gently treating it, using a little plaster, and do not restrain it as tightly as before; treat it with subtlety until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you notice that pus has changed to a reddish color and pain along with swelling are subsiding, indicating healing throughout, then you will need to apply plaster and bandages again, proceeding in the same manner as before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if nothing of what we have discussed happens to the limb, or if it doesn't start healing until after three days, four days, five days, or seven days; and each time let it rest for twenty days according to this method, as long as the wound heals and the alignment approaches from within;
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then you must hold the restraint more than in the beginning, and strengthen their flesh as I have said before. And if you notice that the limb is drying out more than necessary, understand that no surgery can occur;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Apply hot water then, every time you release it, and do this once every day, and gently wash the wound.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Through this method, cut off the gangrene from the limb, and expedite its healing until it no longer resembles what a person would do in pain by forcefully restoring the bent limb: that is wrong, and it has negative effects; I can only see benefits from letting it heal naturally and opening it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Through various methods of breaking up
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many methods of fractures exist, and various shapes can occur; their causes are distinct.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Because there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the collarbone breaks up to the symphysis which is below the bone, just like the head or shaft would do. For this reason, it is called this type of fracture "hatchet break".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword hits the bone from above without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and both large and small injuries result from these two types of fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is sequential impact, or a crack or collarbone fracture caused by stone, or on stone, or other similar conditions.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it has fracture all the way to the membrane which is around the bone, or on top of the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that penetrates the bone as thin as a hair, and this crack is small, and it is called this kind of fracture "cerebral";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made by striking with stone or falling or by any other thing causing a piece of bone to be pushed in, and it results in the limb being broken as they break candlesticks on the candelabras; if the stone enters within the bone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	This happens more often with those whose bones are softer due to moisture, such as in children's bones;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And it occurs through all these ways of breaking, that small fragments are lost as with stones; and I will speak about them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all the ways of breakage by detachment from them, and the examination with forceps, and due to corrupted flesh that is present.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known by this: when one has exposed the bone and rubs it inwards, if there is an opening for black breakage.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of breakage, be vigilant against bad occurrences due to infection, and if you do not see any harmful adverse events, such as vomiting bile, loss of understanding, extension, fainting, ague fever, or if the eyes come out forcefully and turn red, and other similar signs in various dispositions, then cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a serious emergency, yet still hope for salvation, start treatment immediately.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the birth comes to you first, and it is in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the month when you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it's in winter, you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh around the bone becomes rotten, and accidents occur as we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the bone breaks just below the membrane covering the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part like this: and take hold of the head with your hand from where the birth came out, and expose as much bone as you can in all ways on the surface of the bone, and as much as possible according to the shape of the wound.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if blood flow comes to uncover the bone, or in the case of pus, you should assist with what is necessary, and then you should fill the wound with moist cloths soaked in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And have the wound rest until the pus subsides and there is assurance of blood flow; then begin to excavate towards the bone, and this can be done in two ways: one way is that you cut precisely from front to back, which forms a line: the other way consists in removing flesh on both sides of the wound before cutting down to the bone, thus creating an L-shape.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method involves having several different cuts, some narrow and others wide, all with points made of iron. And work them gently to avoid injuring the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and protruding, it is necessary that you pierce through it internally, so that cuts are performed with needles, not straight cuts so they do not penetrate further than the bone under the testicle, and there should be a margin or a circle of about .i. (which could mean one inch) above the point that does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have more than this, so that each comes in its place by the thickness of the bone, so that you have needles for all tests; and this is how the three kinds of needles are formed.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of piercing through the broken bone is such that you place one needle on the bone, and turn with your fingers until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then move another needle slightly after this point; then do so all around internally. Cut out the space between the parts of the bone where the punctures are, doing this more subtly and gently than possible, as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand or any tool you might use such as forceps, tweezers; and make sure not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and removed the bone, it is necessary that you refine what remains of the bone with another tool resembling an incisor tooth, but it must be more robust and finer than the other incisors;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And if there remains no small bones or scales at all, if you lightly manipulate them with one and a half instruments; then treat the wound using dressings and treatments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way of working is this, as Galien stated, which is more careful; and the needle should be very strong, for it's his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to expose a part of the bone, where the fracture opens and moves, so that once you have exposed that part, you will place under the tip of this lens-shaped incision, from which the form is as follows:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one side alone, and make the cut halfway through two ribs, so that you are cutting towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet above, so that you gently scrape all around the entire bone, and be very careful of the cloth that is underneath;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it's pulled out to the bone, do so gently because you'll feel some discomfort, and there will be fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture doesn't go through to the membrane, and the bone is cut only above, and there are small pieces remaining, then you should clean up afterwards with a sharp blade, using various sizes so that each can be used most appropriately according to the manual instructions and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you're using large剃刀, and then finer ones, and continue this process until it's done properly.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	For each of the finer hair trimming and subtle fractures, you must adjust your approach according to its direction; this is a matter that cannot be handled by someone who has dedicated their study to this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if it is discovered that the wound is large, you should take one or two yards of linen according to the size of the wound, soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another layer of linen doubled up to two or three times, and soak it in wine and rose oil, then place it over the first piece of linen; do this as gently as possible so you don't weigh down the wound dressing, then apply a second bandage from above, and pull it tight enough only to moisten the wound.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And leave it like this for one or two days until the abscess has subsided, then remove the dressing and apply medications such as lily roots, ground rue, incense powder, and arnica, among other things; from these ingredients make a powder and put it on the wound, and continue to administer antiseptic medicines without causing irritation.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And ensure that the wound is promptly clean, do not leave pus behind, nor allow it to coagulate. Because when coagulation occurs upon the brain's meshwork, it flows and spreads, causing great harm to the patient; for when something sharp is placed on this spot, it can penetrate upwards.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take care, should anything undesirable happen to the patient, as we have said, it leaves room for doubt without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if only this misfortune comes not because of the medicine that we've applied, should it possess such a virtue, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and add them to a dish, and place it on this spot;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then follow the method of curing until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that neither of the two parts below the nose are broken, or just one by itself, because they are two bones; and this lower one is cartilaginous, it does not break, nor can force cause it to be bent or twisted, then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must bend your little finger or at the nose, and place that break inside your index finger, and outward from the nose, until the nose regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	Do this gently, and watch so that the patient does not feel pain through your operation.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the nose, and cannot come to the nostril, it is necessary that you place it level with the top of a stick somewhat thick.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, redo the operation, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	But if not, after the seventh or eighth day when the wound is calm and healed, then apply a cloth bandage to the top of the nose, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you apply another bandage from the other side, if the break is on that side as well; and make them large enough to cover the depressions around the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they say that for any restorative, one should moisten the tents in butter and change them each day. I do not think this is correct, but it seems they should be moistened during the preparation of a mixture from an egg and powder from mill; then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And always use goose feathers instead of tents, and if you have two raw eggs to cover them, and keep the bandage in place, then let the wound be exposed, letting air through it; do whatever you can see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if the pus comes out to the nose as you work on it, then put on a poultice or wet cotton in rose oil, or in a pinch of hydrazine.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if pus does not come out, then apply a plaster externally, made of sawdust flour and incense powder mixed with yolk butter. Place it on light wicks and do not bind them too tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the bone breaks inside the nose and is broken into small pieces, then use tools suitable for this task to extract them. Then cut along the break and clean out any debris or fragments, and glue them back together, using plasters and remedies that are suitable for this situation;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no injury within the nose, then perform the extraction procedure, and place garlic inside until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	Regarding the rupture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is ruptured internally and there's no wound outside,
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It should be done as follows: If the breakage occurs in the right part of the jawbone,
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if there's a breakage in both halves of the mandible,
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the tooth movements occur, or a rupture, hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place on the broken jaw plaster, and place one double cloth; and place on the cloth a large ramp well made, or a piece of leather equal in size to the jaw, long and wide according to the jaw, and fasten it where you can, command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you notice that the figure changes, let it loose on the third day, and then set what has changed back to its original position; apply plaster, mixing powder from a mill with plenty of egg or flour from almond meal, after you have removed the plaster; place wool lightly on top of the plaster. If the plaster hardens and the patient's positioning does not change, leave it until he is healed; many times are healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if pus comes out of the wound, then treat as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a breakage and wound together, remove any piece of bone that has been extracted; this requires the use of suitable instruments for such tasks.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there is nothing left, if the wound is wide, place one plaster suitable for this purpose on it to promote healing, until it heals properly.
de la forcele	by strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks many times before reaching the shoulder, and the breakage happens in three ways: it breaks and separates into two parts with fragments, which is easier to restore; or there is a break accompanied by injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And when the operation is for a breakage accompanied by injury, if you have two helpers, so that one marks the shoulder where the force has broken; and the other extends their arm towards the injured part; then make the break equal with your hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there are no signs or movements.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a round sponge or cloth under the shoulder blade, and make it as large as needed; stretch out and secure the broken force with your hand, so that you can make the break equal, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the neck due to resistance, because it comes from behind, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back, and place a cushion under one shoulder, and guide the shoulder blade downwards, until the bone of the neck is elevated.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then apply pressure with your fingers, and if you find debris inside, it is necessary to cut downwards; and pull the pieces gently. If the bones cannot join under any force, cut near one of the incisions you have made; but place this tool on the neck instrument to avoid injury there:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	It should resemble a spoon, not be too thick, and be as wide as it needs to be according to the size of the bone and strength of the operation; it must have two points, like this, with one being wider and the other thinner, similar to how you made the incision when you treated the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are assured of the incision being clean, you should suture it up and if there is a small rupture or if you doubt about the cleanliness of the incision, you should cover the wound with bandages and tents according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if there are discharges from them, then moisten with oil roseate and honey and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The process of sharpening bone, when it is with wounds and with tailoring, is to place on the bone a plaster made from the powder from the mill and from egg yolk, and set light wafers on top, and put a sphere under the heel, if you need to;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very long band one palm wide, then place two layers of cloth on top of the wafers and plaster it. Then take a fine staff about three inches wide and long, and wrap it around this band, making sure that the head of the band hangs down;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And set the candle near the wound, and turn the bandage around the neck, and over the clean area, and over the diseased area; and adjust it from each part, and when you see that the healing is advancing towards the wound, and clearly see that the candle does not move above the broken bone, then reward it each day, and when he cleanses him, then restrain him;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	And let the disease heal on its back, and when he sleeps put him a small pillow under his elbow for lifting the shoulder up; this will relieve the breaking of the force through the alignment of the shoulder blade. If you tie his arm around the neck, do not untie it to prevent bad accidents, until twenty days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then continue with the plastering if you see that it's necessary, and bind and leave him like this until he recovers. And she is recovered to the most by twenty-eight days, and in some cases within fewer days, in no one man.
de la brisure de l’espaule	On the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Sometimes the shoulder breaks or splits from its place or in the middle, not just at one end but also further inward, solely through contact; if you deal with it according to the shape of the break and its natural form, using all possible methods. Then apply powder from the mill with plenty of eggs, gently pressing them on, and cover with two layers of cloth; then place a large and delicate table somewhat wider than the shoulder, slightly more so than the shoulder's width, ensuring there are no gaps under any part of the shoulder. Fill these gaps lightly with linseed wads, making sure the table fits evenly; and then tighten it all into one large, tight band, ensuring the table doesn't move from its place, observe each day; and every time it loosens, you should tighten again, adjust the table if necessary, and place the patient on their side; and the shoulder will be healed after twenty days or twenty-five. And when this number is completed, remove the bandage, being sure, for it isn't bone that settles easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone fragment protrudes and is not covered by the flesh, cut it open, and expose the wound; then follow what we have said about healing after muscle rupture to clean out any pus.
de la brisure dou pis	From the breaking of the heel
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The heel is broken only once in the middle, but this happens rarely; it often breaks at the front. And when it's broken inside, it leans away from the heel, causing great pain to the patient and lack of agility, and they may vomit blood, and open movements occur in the broken bone, and one can well feel this.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And in restoration, if the patient lies on their back, and you place them one and a half cubits between their shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and join the two ribbones with your hands, and apply gentle pressure to make it equal in all ways that you can, until the bone figure is as it should be; then place plaster casts over this subtle salt outline, or another light object, cover them with a piece of cloth, and bind them tightly around the broken bone, so they don't move. Then turn the bandage back towards the spine, apply pressure to fit the bone properly, reward each hour for the treatment, and if the swelling subsides, tighten it; and if it seems suitable to release tension or due to itchiness that comes with restlessness, pain or abscess, do so immediately, then loosen them up, remove the plaster casts, and treat as needed according to the prescribed cures. Then replace the bandage, pressuring it until it's healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of bone fracture
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that bone fractures only occur in the larger parts of the back and within the head, and they happen due to their fragility; and one feels this well during examination at the hospital.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And in terms of treatment, if it is to equalize the fracture, just like it should. Then put on the plaster and apply pressure with one hand, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is occurring internally, the patient feels great pain and stabbing, like crying, because the bone punctures the tissue; there are also swellings, chills, sudden vomiting of large amounts of blood, and this causes severe illness, and the old ones used to apply a lot of bandages.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say it's necessary to administer meat that inflates the belly, because it pushes away the windiness outside.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not follow this advice; we only use chalk if it has come to that.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And when it comes to that, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And let no one among us apply suction cups to the body, because of the sucking sensation and it seems reasonable; nonetheless, there is doubt that the suction cup draws excesses to the body due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that when you cover the body with moist wool in oil heated up, and set wadding between the ribs to make the swelling even everywhere, then proceed with the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels intense pain that cannot be borne by the bone piercing the skin, doubt comes to the patient as to whether they should cut into their body where the broken rib is, and it is necessary to place a tool under the swelling; then one must cut through the bone gently, drain it lightly, and stitch together the two edges of the wound if it's large, and treat with plaster until it heals. And if abscesses come about, place moist cloths soaked in rose oil on them, and put these on their body; and treat continuously where it is necessary for abscess treatment, and remain vigilant on that side of the rib where it should be treated, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	from the cracking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No breakage ever occurs to the bones of the neck, and it does not bend; similarly with the spine in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to no one, and you wish to determine whether it will heal or not, if you notice that his hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and he cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, if you do not feel anything. You know that it is in multiple fatal conditions, and if the hands remain unfeeling even when being held still and not moved, you know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and that the patient's condition can be cured, assuming proper treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And when this kind of situation comes to the spine in the back, and you wish to determine whether it will heal or not, be careful if its joints are softened, and if there is an accident akin to hands and on the back causing wind movement and loss of appetite; and when it has been soothed on its belly, if there's still no wind movement. And when it has been treated on its back and it wants to lie upright, it cannot. You know that this is fatal: if it doesn't respond to its treatment at all.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if such incidents do not happen to him, then it becomes a less serious matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that if there's pus coming out, you need to handle it carefully, put on oil at the point of pus or on the spine until it calms down; then apply a supportive and drying plaster and bind it with a bandage. And instruct the patient to rest. Don't sleep on that part where they feel pain until they recover.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is exposed, you must cover it with a poultice; and set the bone, then unite the two edges of the wound if they are large, with stitches, then treat with an ointment that heals and nourishes until it heals. And if the bone chip at the elbow is broken, which is called 'the elbow chip', take your left hand pouch, and place it evenly against your right hand power; then apply the plaster and elevation above you, should you need to use them. Then compress it, and if there's an exposed bone fragment, cut it up, set the bone, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	from the breaking of the bone in the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Sometimes the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, there might be a little pain in the head; and it extends long, declines towards the knee, brings pain to the leg, and bruising, and inflames what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand upwards, as long as you are over the fracture; and know where the break is and its shape. And if the break is only in the head, then make it equal to this break, until it has its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is along the length or it declines towards the inside, then direct the patient to lie on their stomach, as long as you can achieve the restoration of this break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have placed it evenly, put it on the plaster. Then place a charcoal or earthenware stick under it and hold the wound steady, so that it does not move. And apply heat to the area of the back until the wound is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscesses drain out, do not disturb them until the discharge stops, as long as the abscesses remain drained, and apply what we have just mentioned; then return to the treatment and restrain it according to how it should be, provided there is no bad incident. This is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the arm and the head of the shoulder; if it is broken, you should restore it according to one of the two methods: one way is for you to take a rod half an inch thick, like this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And join with two shoulder blades two pieces of string and lay them up high, and place the patient's back up on one seat; then pour their broken arm onto the rod until it reaches the armpit, and is midway along the length of the rod, then lay this against any heavy object or let the helpers hold it downwards; then place the joints in a position equal to their hands together, until the broken bone returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that you place the patient on their back, and tie their hand to their neck, then command two attendants that one should cut at the broken bone from his hands, and the other cuts down right in half an inch lengthwise, and each extends themselves to their respective part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then tie a knot halfway over the wound, and above it, spread each minister to their part. And when the wound is near filled at the head of the shoulder, it should be that you place half a string midway between the ridge, and another towards the edge, midway over the wound; and similarly if the wound is near the edge, it should be that you put a light knot without effort until the wound is even on the ridge and edge; then make the cut evenly as needed, and tighten it, so long as no pus comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if pus comes out, do not tighten it for more than seven days, and apply greased wool in a quiet place and oil of roses until the pus is soothed; then tighten it, and do it with care so that you place plaster on the wound. Afterwards join the arm to the shoulder support, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; and place the cloth, then tighten it on the shoulder support and the arm, ensuring that the arm is straightened without being hindered, or if the bone is not deformed.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you suspect the bone is not moving, use braces and place a larger and stronger brace under the cut than the others, leaving one inch of space between each brace. Ensure that each brace is wide enough to pass through the wound by about three inches from both sides; then tighten on these braces as I have explained at the beginning of this chapter on the wound, with more force but less distance apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the base of the pins and the constriction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt about the pus pocket, if you leave it to be bound for seven days, as we have said; then observe each three days the tie, making sure itch does not cause swelling or anything comes from the wound because it is too tight. If it is difficult, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such events occur, nor the dislocation takes place only after three days or more, and let the patient lie on his back, with his hands on his stomach; and place under the shoulder one cotton cushion filled evenly with wool, and observe every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or the threads are softened; if it is treated by the virtue of medicine, and the meat should be prepared as we have put before you, in such a way that the meat would be at its first refinement; and when it starts to recover, if it is large. And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be recovered within forty days altogether; and then one must dislocate and apply baths and medicines of ointments for the skin to heal. If the constriction is ugly and tangled, then let the dislocation take place again for three days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the 'fosciles'. One bone is small and it creates the socket. The other one is larger and it is located under the small head; sometimes only the large foscile breaks or even both the small and large ones might break.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small bones are broken, restoration is lighter and healing; when the larger ones break, healing is worse and more painful than when they were broken together. If it's only the small bone that breaks, then a gentle stretch should suffice, and to make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it's the large bone, you need to pull harder; place them on one cushion and pinch the hand socket higher than the others, and have the little fingers lower than the other fingers, and ensure that the skin is crossed over itself, and one cushion in front of him that is higher than the skin so that it does not suffer any strain. Then stretch your assistant's arm to the part under his elbow, or at one knuckle, and another assistant above it. And then place the mirrors evenly according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breaking into pieces, you place each one in its place, and if there is none that grabs the key, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do work upon the bone, as we said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if during the healing of the wound, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter; take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if during the beginning of the restoration, abscesses occur, then use this: apply a dressing composed of a plaster made from rosin and white beeswax, ensuring it's neither too hard nor too soft; place one strip of plaster gently over it so that when the abscesses are relieved. Then remove the wax, and apply a poultice mixed with powder ground in the mill along with enough egg; then place the bandage, making sure the poultice is as close to the wound as possible but slightly larger than other areas; and remember that there should be seven or eight bandages arranged differently: if the healing process is inside one bone, perhaps two bones, or more prominently near the wound rather than elsewhere; and each day decrease its application further outwards, just as I explained at the start of this chapter; ensure the bandages covering the wound are soft and moist but neither too hard nor abrasive; use threads made from linen that are not too thick nor too thin, as we have discussed. And after several days, treat the limb and the wound.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any bad incidents occur to the limb, such as itchiness coming to the limb, it is necessary that you immerse the limb in hot water until the itchness disappears; and leave the limb not to be allowed to rest. And then start tightening again, and once the bandage has been removed and the bone is exposed, and assuming something like this, if you adjust.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if care is taken so that no injuries can come to the limb due to it being too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a bit., and leave like this for some days, until the pain subsides, and then start tightening again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have spoken about come to the patient, or if he is not relieved for up to 20 days, then allow him to lift his hands to his neck, and ensure they are level, and be careful with movement and stimulation, and sleep on his back; and know that this treatment has been restored in 30 days or 35 days, and sometimes in 20 days, depending on the compositions and qualities of the remedies.
de la brisure de la main	of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and in us, there are few breaks, and it doesn't happen much, but it does get bent many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the heel of the hand is broken or bent, it should be bound in a crossed manner and placed straight before him equally; then place his hand on an extended surface, extend the fingers of the broken bones, and place them evenly with the eyes, until they are well joined; apply bandages and splints, if no abscesses occur, then place one splint according to its size; it should be wrapped in a single layer of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is in the heel near the belly of the hand sole, then make a ring from cloths, and instruct the patient to place their broken heel inside it; then apply a long piece of cloth, and place one splint according to its size as big as the hand's sole, and secure it properly.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the front, you should place one splint above and another under it on the foot, so that your hand is open and straight, then tie them all around the hand together, and seal the connection between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break affects neither of your hands nor feet, it's likely a sprain; handle it evenly as needed; compress with the foot, and should you see fit to place a small straight splint to lift the sprain, so that it doesn't move; and if the break is in one of your hands or fingers, like in the index finger or any other, handle it evenly, then tie with the healthy finger following behind; or tie them all together while holding firmly, or place on a splint as you would for a sprain; be careful about the restoration and position of each wound, and take care when someone comes to help, just as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone in the arm is broken many times, and one can see it when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is like this: i.e., to bind above the breakage, and i.e., another underneath.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the muscles lie above their face, then extend each minister's tendon to their equal part; and this is when the break lies within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the break is close to the base of the arm, let one tendon be towards the hand and the other away from the break. Similarly, if it's near the elbow, then place the ligament over the elbow and its extension below. Then set the eye so that the bone matches both hands equally, as per its natural figure, and then apply plaster and bind it up; should pus come out, do not worry.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess to heal, let it heal and then return to your work and treatment; the wound is treated in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the wound. That is, a bandage of two layers thick, either three or four times, and retain the excess, then bend the leg until the ankles reach the base of the knee, and insert one long thread between the calf and leg, underneath at the thigh, and guide the thread upwards through the loop; then wrap around the leg and calf with the bandage, then place a wick over the wound, and set a wick on the bone of the leg; then fill the middle eight inches of space between the leg and calf with wet cloth for equal compression. Then begin to bind in three or four turns around the wound; and as you go beyond the wound, bind less tightly; then tie off two threads that you have inserted between the leg and calf, and set three wicks above them, then return down under the thread loop until you reach beneath the foot; and tighten if it doesn't move from its place, then leave it like this, so long as no other sign of an abscess or swelling appears.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, release and guide what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that catch hold, it should be removed if possible; and if it cannot, it is necessary to cut through the wound and drain out force; and treat it as we have said, until it becomes healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no part of the flesh is broken when such needles are inserted, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, in such a restoration done there is no complaint from the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the flesh is restored within one day or possibly slightly more, or less, depending on the individual's complexion variations.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the alley of the liver
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the alley of the liver there is little fracture, but it bends many times. And if it does break, it's only a crack, or one or two parts broken off, and it happens to all injuries, and even without injury, and this can be felt well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for the restoration, one should place the long ones evenly at their ends until everything is assembled and moving. Then apply plaster, and place a round support if needed, then adjust as necessary. Afterwards, revise all preparations that we have discussed in other injuries such as abscesses or similar conditions; apply what is suitable to each situation until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Know that there are two bones in the leg, from which one is named straight by right as 'ham' and the other is called 'tibia'; and all injuries occur just like they do on the arm, and for this reason the restoration is similar to that of an arm equally, and the procedures are exactly the same.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if the two bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bones are broken, then one feels great pain and sees it clearly; turn to one side. Then apply extension, make them equal, and tie them equally; but still, if the break is ugly and there are multiple pieces, that the extension should be lesser and more gentle; and adjust according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two fathom lengths of hemp rope that support the leg on both sides, and each should be as long as the leg from the knee to just below. Then wrap them with two strips of leather around the legs from top to bottom, tie them in the middle too, so the leg cannot move either to the right or left. And thus it is well; no one administers a single rod of hemp that’s as long as the leg and made of hemp, they set the leg straight for warding off movement, and properly do you perform this when there's injury; and move the leg every day, to see if there is an abscess or any other incident; treat it until it becomes healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of bone fracture from the chest
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	An ankle injury does not come from a fracture, but each time there is a bone breakage and in the foot bones, it only means being hurt in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a bone breakage in the foot bones, and you see these bones pushing each other upwards, place your heel on the ground just like they would want to go. Then put your foot right under them at the point where the bones are raised; press it so much that blood returns to their veins. Then apply plaster and bandages over this area. Put a small wooden table with two filled foot holes under the belly of the foot, then pull it up to the heel extension, then wrap cloths around it or do other things you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if you find the tie undone, because you will find the bones equal, whether broken or healed.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the ribs are broken, you should restore them as we have said about the ribs of a hand; then place one on each broken rib according to its length, and make it somewhat wider, then set the foot of this table that I mentioned under the patient's body, and tighten in the fitting. And if there are two or three or more, you should break them, putting one under each rib according to their quantity, wrapped in a single piece of linen, and tighten the table underneath the body; and while being at the front of the table over the abdomen below the foot, so that it pinches well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you should not forget the other things I've said about other injuries, just like we have discussed; and address each situation according to how it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	regarding the breaking of the hand bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the womb is broken, so that it becomes swollen, then place it in a spread out position on the back part and support it from behind. Then fill the cavity nature creates with cotton, also putting an amount as big as one's fist into this opening. Next, make the woman stand up and lift her back little by little. At this point, the cotton will be released until it reaches the entrance of nature, at which point the bone returns along with the swelling. And when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton; upon urination, let her get back in position, repeating this process for seven days or more: thus, the brokenness will be restored. If you see fit, take a bladder from a ram, tie it onto one end of a stick, and fill all the bladder inside nature. Then blow into the stick forcefully until the bladder is inflated internally; nature will return to restore the breakage. After that, fill with cotton and let her stay in this position for several days until she is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the hand in an animal is broken, or that of a person, if it is restored in this manner as we have said for the hip bone; and these broken bones should not go unnoticed by the one who devotes their study and usage to them, and who reads my book. For brokenness signifies many expressions for the right way of restoration: thus understand it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the case of a broken penis, take an opossum's throat and fill it with the penis; then wrap it in bandages around the area, and let it be for three days or as long as needed; it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the person who has a broken bone with a wound, even if it's large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or something similar, that they should be treated now, so that the treatments we have said show their effectiveness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, treat it with vitriol, if you don't have anything else, then try again to heal the break at the same time or that day, or if no pus appears.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if pus appears, let the healing continue until the next day, as long as the pus is soothing, and don't touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause harmful incidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if you see bone broken out above the knee exposed, it is necessary that you place your hands on it lightly, in a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions have not been prepared to be equal in your hands, then use this iron tool that is made of iron, which should be between seven or six inches long, and its width is according to the size of the wound; for this, you must know how to apply three or four, depending on what it requires in each treatment for fractures; and they should be round and somewhat thick so they do not bend under compression against your body when working on the limb, and they should have a pointed tip at the front and be thick toward the middle in the front.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainche" for that reason; so the curved ends should be placed on top of the exposed part of the bone. And hit once or twice until it returns and stays level with each other. And if the fracture is fine and the tools can't properly grasp the bone, then you need to hold onto the tip of the bone as long as the tool can reach it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone to its place as we have said, if you have access to a suitable tool for this purpose, such as an incisor or scalpel, by your own strength; then remove what is remaining inside the hard and minor scrapes of the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is returned and the patient feels intense pain afterwards, you should know it isn't in its natural place. If you must have it there, then moisten it with one drachm of black, stinking wine, and properly if it's external; and do not put anything like ointment or other substance that has caused an irritation on the wound, which could lead to infection and decay; instead ensure the wound remains free from infection. Give this care when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound exposed, applying a covering suitable for its size, and be very cautious so as not to tighten it with bruising; many times people did this wrong, causing death or corrosion at the wound site; and make sure that the compresses are softer and more soothing than other injuries.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt that harmful incidents may have occurred, as we've said, and you find pain in the limb, it doesn't suit to apply bandages; but wrap around tightly instead of bandages with hard cloths and secure them. And when after one day or two days you see a healing sign at the wound, then remove what you've placed over it completely with wine, and put on a healing ointment for wounds, such as the tetracycline ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary for you to dislocate the limb two times a day, in the morning and at dusk, until it is healed and restored.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it must be that the limb is treated in such a way that the joint moves freely with light force.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if this happens for several days, and it cannot heal anymore at all from the joint movement, know that there are small fragments of bone causing this, so you must treat the wound with caution, and remove all these dead bone fragments that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula occurs at the joint or through any other form of corruption, it must be treated according to what was explained in his previous chapter. And when bone is broken and open within the limb, such as bones of the knee or shoulder, or other parts of large limbs, do not remove them; many times death results from this action but leave it until it heals. By chance, it may heal after 20 days or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; if you cannot, leave it as is.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The blows that come from sweat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	They often come after the healing of the bruising, even when it's close to the joint, and this is something to see in the form of the limb; and by chance cannot do its natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, be vigilant when it comes to this fresh condition: if you administer any of the stictching medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, along with sarccocolle, senna, or similar things; as you would take any of these items, or all together, mix them with stictching wine, or plenty of egg whites, or honey; then place them on the spot in poultices, firmly apply, don't remove it by hand for days; and after that dislocate it, start anew until the swellings are removed; or you can apply this to a well-made piece of plaster; because the properties of the plaster is such that it removes all swellings from the limbs; and if the swelling has turned into hardness like stone and needs removal, cut through it from above, reveal the excessness clearly; or remove it with no barber's tools until it is removed, then treat until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The limb that becomes weak after confinement
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the breaking of bone is restored, and after it remains, if the limbs are weak and fine, this happens for various reasons: due to these conditions:
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is as follows: you must feed the patient with meat and make their body tender until they multiply within him. Then, administer baths and provide them joy and relief. Afterwards, apply grease to the limb, so that the grease draws towards the main bleeding point, and washes it frequently with tepid water, until the bleeding matches up with the limb; and restore its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	If the member is bent after recovery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and if the bone breaks open, even though the form of the limb is ugly, it does not lose its natural function: nor should one believe those who say that you must break the entire member anew; many people have done this in our land; these practices are criticized, causing large harms, and even death. However, if the swelling and pain are fresh, they should be treated with hot water or with heated softening herbs like mint leaves, roots, and melilot. And one makes a plaster for softening, such as well-made dyaquilon, taking the mint paste and mixing it with linseed oil or safflower oil, then applying this plaster on top; alternatively you take greased figs, grind them with clove powder, and similar medicines that alleviate heat.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And never stop rubbing the dislocated joint with wet hands continuously and for a long time. And allow some movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the dislocation has aged and hardened, like bone, and requires being treated with iron, if it suits to cover up to the bone, do so with a gentle incision. And apply pressure and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation happens without any reason, if it corresponds now to be brought back without hesitation.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one delays, the limbs swell up, and by chance, if it is put back with points on the joint; because it's not proper to move him at the time when they are swollen: many times bring pus and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	When this happens, if you find a patient, let the person lie until all the pus is subsided; then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, then gently move it, and cure each member according to how they appear in their usual place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder dislocations up to this point.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jaws are dislocated downward, and the dislocations of both occur in two ways: either they are slightly osteoarticular at their joints, and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the bottom, causing them to not be able to hold saliva in their mouth, nor can they close their mouth, and wrap their tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through several positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it's complete and accomplished, you must reset it quickly, without causing any harm;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And in such a way that the ministers cut the head of the patient with care, and press one of their thumbs into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth; if the dislocation is at two inches; and the other hand should be free to ensure balance; and instruct the patient to soften, his jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And press the thumb equally, until it regains its position in place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if returning it causes pain, even if these are the two jaws combined, if they arise from hot water and oil, do so lightly when resetting; neither should you force the return, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are returned equally, and the mouth of the diseased person closes well with mollification, then place wet cloths as bandages in a paste made of rose oil and beeswax, then bind them lightly with moist strips.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And let the patient sleep on their back, and have their shoulders resting between two cushions, so they do not move to either side or force themselves to twist, but procure them light food, until the pains are relieved, and ensure that the jaws are closed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then taste it lightly, and do not allow difficulty in opening the mouth for eating or drinking until the mandible is well healed and recovered.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be properly reunited in an hour and are not returned to their original positions, fever and chronic discomfort ensue, along with sudden stomach pain or vomiting of undigested food.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times, death has befallen the one who encounters it within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the lever
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The strength cannot relieve within the continuity of it and beneath the waist, and is dislocated every time at the back, and well we feel it.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the relief is that the patient lies supine on their back and extends their arms; then press onto their chest forming to your palm, and it will return. Then place them on the plaster bed and the bandage, and apply pressure;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	And the head that faces the knife cannot be relieved; if not, and if it dislocates even once, then you must reset it to its place as we have said; then place them on the plaster bed and the bandage, and apply pressure, and command the patient to rest until they are sane.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And similarly, the head of the spine is brought back when it is removed from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: by which one happens when it dislocates to the part of the scapula below; and the second occurs at the part underfoot; and sometimes dislocates at the top part, and this rarely happens;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And it never dislocates behind the shoulder, nor within the nerves; and many times dislocates towards the scapula, even in those with little flesh, because when they leap they happen quickly; for those who have enough flesh, they jump by points and return by points.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And it happens to some men by accident or through bruising, and the shoulder swells from an abscess that forms quickly, and they believe it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary then that you try it out, as long as you are certain; and only then start the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And when you recognize dislocations as they move towards the shoulder blade, and make a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, you will find their distinct manifestation between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	You will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and along the spine to the neck, it is like having an elbow; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movements.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And also, if it is dislocated above, even if it's not completely hidden, you will find it clearly at the neck.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	This method of dislocation can only be resolved through repositioning, especially when it is new or involves the shoulder bone.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And this method involves the ministers lifting their hand from under the flesh up high, then placing their thumbs on the shoulder blade and lifting the joint forcefully up towards its normal position; and the ministers lift the hand and extend it upwards, putting it back down in place; if it moves quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not move as we have described within days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and the attendant should apply soothing treatments, such as decoctions of sage, fenugreek, and hollyhock in water, and administer them.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then wrap the patient's back with a cloth, and place a cushion of even thickness under their shoulder blade, neither too soft nor too hard. Then put the heel on the cushion, and lift the shoulder joint gently, and pull the hand from beneath the flesh.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	And another physician cuts the neck of the patient, so that it does not move forward; this shoulder has just returned now, and if you see if you reset it in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And you should have the patient present at home, who is larger than the patient; and keep them upright towards the side, and support their shoulder on the back of the neck, and lift the back upwards, so that the patient hangs in a recumbent position.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And another physician pulls the hand of the patient towards his body from behind. And if the patient is too light, then even with nothing heavy pushing against him, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And you also reset it in another way: and one sticks a long stick into the ground, such that the shoulder is placed as with a pistol, and it should neither be too big nor too thick;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then have it placed near the patient's body, but make sure there is a shield of flesh above and below, and let the limb stay as long as the length of the stick. Then extend your hand from the other side downwards in formation, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it doesn't return through all the things we have said, then perform this cure: take one arm stick of two big ones and four large sticks, which has its head rounded to fit in smoothly on the inside at an angle, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie at the head of the stick that is covered with flesh so it doesn't injure the patient, then place the stick under the limb; and extend your arm along the stick as long as possible, and tie the shoulder support onto the stick, and your arm at the elbow joint, then put your arm on one of the handles of the bed on its wide side, and let your hand hang downwards from the other side: the joint will return in this position now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it has been done, in whatever way it is, so that you should place upon the surface of the bone an equal needle, then apply the plastered preparation with powdered from the mill, along with incense and egg oil, all over the shoulder blade and around it, then remove from under the bone addition, and tie again to the plastering, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain like that.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it must be chewed a little, until the limbs are strengthened, because it will heal faster; and then chew more after five days or seven, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is loose due to moisture that has caused it, or for some other reason, you should apply three successive cauteries to it, as was described earlier in the section on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all of this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint doesn't hold, and cannot lift your arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder has been stretched or weakened; and know that the joint would never have been placed in its right position.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocation near the buttocks, and breasts, or behind, is caused by pushing and stretching of hands, and it's administered elsewhere; and treatment should be given while it is still clean.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes itching on the limb, and slowly with movements, then bathe the patient several times until this itch is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	From the dislocation of the shoulder bone
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at its points and returns to them; it has been dislocated from all sides, as well as in front and behind, and dislocations are not restored because you see and feel it clearly; and it gets dislocated according to each position.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the shoulder bone with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. Because the joint is bony and cannot bend the arm or touch his shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in this way so that the abscesses are on each side when they swell, because if they were on one side and came out, there would be a complaint about bringing them back; and by chance, it cannot be brought back completely, even when it's behind; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance, death comes from it.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And for its restoration when it can be brought to that position, you extend their hand with both of yours; and their arms are spread out, and the hands face towards the center according to the length of the arm, forward and backward, and push the joint onto the bones together, or at the base of their palm, until they return to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if it is a dislocation at the front, then it returns when they double their hand to their hand, and push from the base of the palm with the bone that has moved out.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it doesn't want to return to its place, then apply strong extension; and when both of them extend their arm, and each holds the bone, so that it does not move during extension. Then turn the arm from every side, then once you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when you hold the joint together with your hand, if you rub some oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly until it heals;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is at its place, place it with a plaster and egg white, hold it firmly, and allow the arm to be bent close to the side, then leave it for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, release the tie, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not fit well, reapply the plaster and the tie, and leave it like this for some days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if it feels painful after returning the joint to its place and it moves again, bathe and rub it well, press until it is relieved; or you can apply a lamb's fat on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove the bandage and let it bathe in water.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when they sweat, rub the joint gently then put it back in its place and then into water; and do this twice or three times until you see improvement. If possible, apply moist cow's fat heated with butter on top and leave it there; if done correctly, it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand's dislocation subsides and the recovery is quick, more so than other joints. One should immediately bring it back to its place while it is still dislocated, in this same moment when it has subsided, so that the limbs swell or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the realignment is as follows: you place your hand on a table and extend the minister's hand, and then observe them being made equal, so that their palm touches the appearance of the joint, and hold it until she regains her position.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Always, it must be that you check if it is properly in place; then have the patient put the back of their hand on a table during extension and realignment.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then have the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and observe them putting their hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it is well done.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If that doesn't work, then the application of plaster to alleviate abscesses might help, and leave it like this without needing to start over.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after some days, then the joint will remain twisted.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And it does no harm to the patient as long as the hands are immersed, and cannot tighten anything completely: thus you know that the nerve is cut, or the artery; if there is no other way than to apply pressure with a cautery in such cases, and by chance there is no other option.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in place, place on the plaster as we have said, then apply pressure and leave it for five days, then release and let it be like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well and there is no stiffness, then use warm water, and rub until it becomes clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	From the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Neither are the fingers of the hand ever dislocated on each side, nor at the back of the palm or belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Therefore keep the fingers, and prevent the dislocation in your pockets until they recover, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated;
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and leave it for two days, and then put it back on that day; and don't let it move, as we have said, and the dislocation of the day, and make it move, and fasten it again at night; and do this often, until it is snug.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do the same, if it dislocates in the shoulder socket, and do it as you did before until it is properly aligned; and do the same, when it dislocates on the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	For dislocation of the ankle, for dislocation of the back.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the ankle or the back (or neck) is dislocated, or when there are multiple dislocations, if no treatment is given, because death rushes to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the discharges jump without will, and cannot be held back, and often all body parts, or both legs, or both arms, or one of them become softened.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times it shrinks to quarters; that one which shrinks at the back is called 'gibbousness':
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is that you should reward if the gibbousness has come from childhood: if there is no treatment or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And the one that comes from falling, impacts, or similar things, according to old methods of treatment by grand words, they do not bring any full benefit;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have summarized it according to my intention, and formed tools in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the condition of childbirth coming to the front of the womb, there is no harm or danger for either mother or child.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also this is true when it goes straight down to both sides, and one can only cure what comes directly towards the back, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it happens that the body extends up to its waist in one equal length, and has strain over itself, so as not to be hurt;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then stick a thorn in the middle of the body into the ground and form it into a shape, and another at the elbows, and tie one string under the armpits of the body, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	And two doctors know how to tie them, one at the head and others at joints, among these two sticks;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And make sure they are well closed, the stick as we have said, and set her palms on the spine points, until she regains consciousness.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if this treatment does not work, take a board of three arms long, and place it under her body, and if the patient is on their side, position the head of the board under her body, then place the middle part of the board at the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And have her place her feet on the other end of the board, press well, until she regains consciousness at the head; and if you can, do it at the wrist that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And you should stick two needles into the middle of one arm's bad side, and towards the elbows two others, with each needle between them, immediately above and below, a handspan long;
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And place one or two threads at each needle, or in the bend of the arm, and ensure that each needle is firmly stuck into the ground so they do not move; between every two needles, place another twisted needle corresponding to where its joint bends, and have two small needles between the bent ones, a handspan long, for turning the elbow.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then tie the thread that is among the elbows at the elbow towards the head, and the other thread towards the elbows at the other elbow, and each of the servants turns his elbow to all the thread, and the masters make the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are even, place them under drying plaster with abundant egg whites, and then apply oil, and afterwards rub in a tablet of one and three-quarters inches long, which purges the area around the boil and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and use the patient's subtle itching until it heals;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	And if anything comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the application that we have said before; and whenever it is administered there should be one piece of paste.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And if there appears behind the lower spine in the back, take care that it is dislocation; and this bone opens up, so one should not have any assumption about it: by chance it could bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder only cause dislocations, not in any other way like others. And the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside than outside, a little dislocated in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of internal dislocation is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and the diseased knee opens more than the healthy one. The diseased knee cannot bend under fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is when the limbs are swollen from abscesses, because of where the joints come into play.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who approaches death is that this event is contrary to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who approaches beforehand, are that his leg is well in accordance with completion; yet, he does not double even a step without pain, and if one tries to make him walk, he cannot move forward, and retains his urine, and swells the belly, and when he walks, he goes on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who approaches behind, are that he cannot spread his step, nor double it, and this leg is more curved than the other, and the belly is flattened, and the shoulders come down to the back under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The process of this sign indicating dislocation is that you should confirm if the dislocation is old and remains in its position, without any treatment; and there should be no assumption made about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you quickly restore the joint, and stretch it inside and outwards, and move it to the right and left; if it returns, no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return this way, you should apply one strong remedy, and hold the leg very strongly with two hands, or to the point where one is bound above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And apply other remedies by extending his hand like this so that he pushes his hands out from under the armpits, then pulls him with a strong effort to the thigh; and hold his head against the rope.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And stretch up and down at once throughout, until the patient is lifted from the ground in one go, and stays suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This stretching method applies to four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, just like we have explained, it is correct.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	But if not, the treatment should match its appearance. When dislocations are in the chest, it is necessary to have the patient lie on their healthy side, then place the bandage at the base of the arm, and above the armpit, then pull the bandage up towards the armpit, and towards the back;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then have another attendant hold the patient's arms, and encircle the large part of the diseased arm with your hands, and stretch it upwards in this formation: if it returns to its position now; and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot enclose it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet together with a strong cord at their heels and at their knees, and let the ill-affected leg extend more than two feet compared to the other one.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then have it hung from the head of a pole, and two feet above the ground; then command that one minister embrace the head of the thigh bone, and let other ministers hang with the ill-affected side, embracing to form the thigh bone, for now the joint returns quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at the front, if it lies on the ill-affected side, as we have said in the case of someone who has a limp, and holds one cord properly on the ill-affected leg and also on the foot.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then take two needles, one at the head and one elsewhere on the body, then stick a needle between the legs of the patient in the form;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have wet cloths placed inside, so that it does not blister the patient, then stretch each minister towards him, and place an equal distance from his hand for the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that's good. If not, place him on a table and press him in such a way as we have said for the gripostitis, and lie the patient on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it must be stretched quickly, and according to what I said; and place the patient's pain on the diseased side, then press with the other hand, and pull down from the waist towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the back, it does not require extending the patient's head, nor lifting from the ground. Instead, it should be like when the hip was dislocated behind, as we said about lying on both hips;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and if it's at the waist, and the head is stretched in the way we previously mentioned, and one should apply pressure to the joint on the bed;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and it will be right when the limb extends its legs, and they are equal; then adjust the thighs, apply plaster, and bind tightly with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and let it rest for three or four days, then release it and place the plaster; and if you see that they are equal, tie them again as before, and leave it like this for three more days; then release it, and allow it to move properly, until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From shoulder dislocation due to arthritis
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees can be dislocated in three ways: that is to say, from within and without, and behind; and do not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs for this are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their knee. If they cannot bend it at their knee, know that they are dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back on their hip, and put their foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	Then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your fingers, then bend the two knees gently. And some other attendants extend his foot as far as the knee returns to its place, until the signs show that he has easily put his leg under his thigh.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then place the dressing there, and let his leg rest against his thigh, and unite them firmly for three or four days, then release him; and do not move the limbs excessively until the wounds are healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limbs are not fully recovered, administer strong exercises as we have described in the treatment of the hip, until they improve.
de la dislocation dou talon	From the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never fully set and always partially dislocated, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs of this are that the ankle is swollen, and tends forward to the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The reduction is easy; one should gently extend it with their hands when only properly set.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated completely, you should have the patient sit straight, and hold them up with two assistants from behind using their leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull the leg towards you with your right hand, and then also with your left hand twice, then stretch it up, and firmly hold the leg up high;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this two times, just as we have said, by holding and pulling the leg; if it returns, that is well; if not, start the procedure again, for it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return like that, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place two sticks firmly in the earth between their buttocks, and bind them with cloths so as not to bruise the leg.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then the surgeons prepare the leg, and some other surgeons extend his feet up to his hands or halfway down his body, as they tie it around his neck.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then extend each surgeon evenly, and place the patients' legs so they are between the surgeon's thighs to hold the patient when they extend.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then align each joint evenly with their hands, and some other surgeons cut the healthy leg at that location, and the dislocated joint will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it's in the right position, place the plaster and bandage on top, then firmly tighten, bind the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the anklebone, making sure the bandages aren't too tight.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then let it for two or three days and if the wound heals, then strain it; then release it on the third day or quarter of a day, and encourage the patient with four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if it progresses beyond this termination, it's not safe to assume that it will no longer dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pus comes out and goes away, then you should soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, while it is still healing.
des dois	The text seems to be cut off at "des dois". Without more context or surrounding sentences, it's difficult to provide an accurate translation for this phrase alone. However, based on the preceding lines and considering the style of Old French medical treatises from medieval times, this might translate roughly as:
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both shoulders are dislocated, if they need to be beautifully stretched for manual work, and this is a simple task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocations are in neither the neck nor the back, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his full length or on a table completely straight, and place your foot where the joints open, then press with your foot firmly until he comes to his senses;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when he is level and there's nothing opening, then place under the foot a table with two shoulders, then press firmly, and leave him for three days, then reset it; and let him rest until he recovers.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	regarding wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When injury accompanies dislocation, and one seeks to restore it, many times the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you lack skill in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful but rather hesitant, do not be reckless;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and begin with calming things like abscess removal, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope of recovery;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, immediately reset the limb to its original place, so that the abscesses drain and heal;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limbs are at their proper places, administer things that alleviate abscesses and cuts from the cautery, and treat the wound accordingly, with the use of dried remedies.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if there's fracture along with dislocation, and small bones are broken, set the bones, do as we have advised for simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And guard against entering into a state of fear according to what I have said, for you must act as per your Creator, and through knowledge arm yourself and protect your body. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	End the chapter on anatomy
